Johnson, Henry T. Murder Link (The)   [ 1866 ]
  
Murder Link (The) Johnson, Henry T. 1866
All gables and shadows, the Lone House loomed against the cloudy sky. Elmer Dring, pushing through the rusty gate with creaked expostulation, reflected that the abode, like the apparel, oft proclaimed the man, for never was house shabbier or drearier than the Lone House wherein Old Stingy lived.

Its windows were as bleary as his eyes and as grimy as his hands; patched, too, as crudely as his garments; its garden was as ragged, its grass plot r tangled and matted as his hair. In the centre of i that grass plot yawned the cracked basin, all grey and green with moss, of the duckweed covered fishpond.

On the other side of the dank, weed-choked path a gaunt and grisly cedar swayed its sombre head and waved black, bony arms, as though despairing of the desolation beneath its shadows.

If Elmer, letting fall the rust-red knocker with a reverberating thud upon the dingy door, had been a creature of imagination instead of a solicitor who dabbled in financial speculation, and whose heart and soul were concentrated in his dabbling, he might have said with Thomas Hood, "The house is haunted."

And when that huge door, after much clanking and rattling of bolts, swung back and Jane Collins stood framed in the gloom of its portal, he might have deemed he saw the ghost.

'"Old man at home?" he asked, and Jane Collins answered: "Fancy asking !"

"I didn't know for certain," he sniggered, apologetically. "I thought it just possible he might have gone to the mayoress' fancy dress ball or up ,to London for a ramble round the West-end, he's such a gay dog."

"That you, Elmer?" a voice croaked out of the darkness of the worm-eaten staircase, and Elmer, his tone changing from mockery to suavity, replied: "Yes, Mr. Abbs. HoW's your bronchitis?"

"What's that do with you? You ain't a doctor?" rasped the bowed figure at the stair-head; and Elmer Dring, after just a momentary fierce convulsion of the features, laughed merrily.

"Did you hear that, Jane? He will have his joke: Did ever anybody know such humour?"Then under his breath he muttered: "The fellow ought to be dead."

"I want a word with you," whispers Jane Collins. "Hurry up ! hurry up!" comes the raven-like croak again; "I am standing in a draught."

And Elmer Dring, whispering, "When I'm going! " and fixing his hat and overcoat upon a peg, chirps, "All right, Mr. Abbs, I'm coming," and with quickened footsteps ascends the creaking, gloomy stairs and follows the old miser into the barely-furnished room that serves him for sitting-room and sanctum.

A chess-board, with the pieces all set out, lies ready upon the table. The miser, taking up a black pawn and a white, and placing his hands behind him, passes and repasses them from fist to fist.

But first he asks: "Did you put the screw on Saunders?"

"I did, and he gave me a bill of sale upon his sticks for interest, principal and costs."

"Burgoyne?"

"I put in execution; he and his wife arc going to the union to-morrow."

"There! Didn't I say they were dishonest? Fancy a man hardly seventy, and his wife, burdening the rates with their maintenance. How about Flinders?"

The lawyer hesitated, pursing his double chin.

"He wants another month to pay up in."

"Well, he can't have it; he can't have another Week, another day; foreclose to-morrow; sell up the farm, stock, plant, and homestead—lock, stock, and barrel; pack him off to join his friend Burgoyne in the workhouse!", The deep-sunken eyes sparkled, the veins stood out in the bald and shiny cranium, every fibre of the old man's being twitched with the intensity of greed and rage, and he went off into a fit of coughing that left him panting—almost collapsing—in the high arm-chair beside the table.

Meantime below, bolts, chains, and lock were clanking and clattering; other footsteps creaked up the stairway.

"Judex!" said the old man, listening; and the ' second visitor, as lean as the first was plump, as black and swarthy as the first was white and pink, entered the room.

The lawyer seemed to hail the interruption with relief.;' Not so the old man, who had failed to beat down the doctor below half a crown for visit and medicine.

"I heard you coughing, " said the latter, severely, "even as I approached the gate,' and you have no fire."

"I don't want it; the room is quite hot, isn't it, .Elmer?''..said the old man, hastily, endeavouring to repress a shiver. "You'll stay and play the conqueror, doctor?"

"Providing I may keep my overcoat on," Judex Esslin answered, taking a third chair as the others seated themselves and began the game.

All three being enthusiasts, they sat for a long while, very like three ravens, in a silence broken only by the intermittent click of pieces moved or taken, and an occasional "Check!" or "You can't go there!" until at last Gideon Abbs, triumphantly exclaiming, "Got you! " came down with his queen, .and pinned the black king against a horde of his own men.

"Mate l " croaked the miser, and leaned back in his chair, And Judex Esslin remarked: "Yes, you might have made that move much earlier," and with the pieces he demonstrated how.

"Yes, yes," grunted Gideon Abbs, with puckered forehead, "but the fact is my mind was running on something else. It generally is, for almost always some rascal's trying to rob me."

The lawyer looked up suddenly. "Now, mark me!" said Gideon. "You foreclose on Flinders's farm to-morrow; put the screw on; sell the very bed from under him."

"The law won't let me do that," replied the lawyer, "more's the pity. After all, what's the hurry? I don't say it wouldn't serve him right, only you remember what the jury said when Tom Spatchett suicided after you'd sold him up."

"What do I care?" almost screamed the old man. "After all, what did they say? Didn't they bring 'it in temporary insanity? The man was mad, wasn't he, doctor?"

"Everybody is," answered Judex Esslin, seizing the opportunity of trotting out the hobby which absorbed him. "The insanity dormant in all men in his instance took the form of suicidal monomania."

And while they rearranged the pieces, Judex Esslin, who detected kleptomania in a child's grab at its father's watch-chain and incipient dipsomania in a thirsty porter's request for a pint of beer, was warming thoroughly to his arguments, when Gideon Abbs, who regarded them with the contempt born of, familiarity, snarled: "Stuff and nonsense! Let's talk of something else. Elmer, old Burbidge was sold up to-day."

"I know," the other nodded. "Did you go to the auction?"

"Yes; it was a beautiful morning."

"Do any good?"

"Not much; it was poor lot of stuff, just what you'd expect of half-pay Service people—all pride and poverty. To my mind the greatest curiosity is the craze for collecting curiosities. If people want to collect anything, why don't they go in for modern coins?"

"Buy anything?"

"One or two small lots that I can sell again. I say, Elmer, are you anything of a lapidary?"

The other shrugged his shoulders, and Gideon turned an inquiring look upon the doctor, who, with a sardonic smile wreathing his dark-lined face, inquired: "Why? Have you been buying diamonds for beads?"' "No such luck! " snarled Gideon. "But amongst the captain's curios there was a case of weapons he'd picked up in different quarters of the world; such rubbish didn't appeal to me, except one little dagger thing, the hilt shaped like a coiled and twisted scaly snake, the turned-back mouth making all of guard, and for a fang it's got a blade of blue steel."

"Fancy collecting such creepy things!" : Elmer Dring; and Esslin, harping on his remarked: "A man's hobbies form the index to his The man we speak of in question collected lethal weapons—instruments of death. What form mania was incipient in him? Don't you see, only thing wanting was the peculiar combination circumstances and conditions to make that man murderer, only natural death came along first, he will sleep in the shadow of a tombstone, inscribed with a glowing epitaph."

"Do be quiet !" expostulated the miser; " make one's flesh creep. Of course I gave a fair price for the things at public auction; mine was highest bid, and the widow couldn't make a could she, Elmer, if one of the snake's eyes that thought was red glass and the other that she t for green glass should turn out to be—well, a ruby and an emerald?"

His cunning little eyes peered inquiringly from under their bushy brows into those of the lawyer who, together with the doctor, forthwith a keen interest in the lethal lot he had that purchased at Burbidge's auction; and after a rising, he with some hesitation crossed the room disclosing a collection of murderous weapons had been worn in various waistbelts.

An Italian stiletto, a Spanish poniard, a backwoodsman's bowie-knife, a Malay creese, a strangely-fashioned weapon worn by a Creole to secure her blue-black tresses—and defend her honour. These and others—but the old man, with a hoarse, guttural cry, exclaimed: "The snake dagger ! It's gone—gone—gone! Someone has stolen it!"

"Impossible!" his guests exclaimed, simultaneously, and Elmer Dring suggested he might have left it that morning at the sale; but the old man cried excitedly, even angrily: "No, 'no! I locked it in the case there before I left the house. I tell you it's been stolen. Some wicked thief has guessed its value. I tell you the handle was of virgin gold—Californian gold—that's why there was no hallmark on it. The one eye was a ruby, the other an emerald, and the sheath was inlaid with jade! I know—I know! "

Dashing across the room, he tugged frantically at the bell, and to Jane Collins, ascending the stairs, he shrieked: "Send up that girl! "

"Tut! tut!" both guests exclaimed, remonstratingly. But he turned fiercely upon them: "Hold your tongues! I know what I am doing. I tell you I will not be robbed! "

A lighter footstep sounded on the stair, the door opened, the room was entered by a girl. A mere slip of a girl, meanly clad, but so exquisitely beautiful that the eyes of both doctor and lawyer lit up as they fixed on her a steadfast gaze, only relaxed when each gave a furtive, watchful glance at the other.

"Come here, you jade! you hussy! you ungrateful baggage!" cried the old man.

Then, fastening the door behind her, and pointing to the opened case, he demanded fiercely and . hoarsely: "Where is it? Where is the other one?"

"What do you mean?" the girl exclaimed, the peach bloom dying from her cheeks, leaving them white and fair as lilies. "Oh, what does he mean?" and she fixed her long-lashed, violet eyes wide opened on the two visitors, seeking an explanation of this latest item of the long string of insult, injury, vituperation, and false accusation.

"Speak out, you wretched Jezebel! See! I have witnesses. Tell the truth. Where have you hidden the snake-shaped dagger with the hilt of gold? Come, confess at once, or Jane Collins fetches in a constable! "

"I don't even know what you mean!" cried the girl, in an anguished tone. "You know I never wronged you in my life; you know I am incapable of anything dishonest. Oh! do please let me go away from here; you hate me so—why do you keep me prisoned here? "

"Listen to her! " shrieked the old man. "That's gratitude! That's my return for giving her, five years ago, a home, a shelter; that's my return for feeding and clothing this outcast, penniless pauper-pauper—pauper—thief!"

He flung the words at her as though they had been missiles, and she indeed flinched and writhed with anguish as though each of them had struck her physically.

But the last lie roused her from anguish to desperation.

"No, no! " she said. "You shall not call me that; I will not stay to hear it! Day by day you have . taunted me with my poverty. Well, then, I will do what I have implored you to let me do day by day and year by year; I will go away from;this place I hate, and where I am hated, and by work win the bread of independence! There are magistrates ; I will appeal to them to aid me to my liberty.

I cannot—I will not stay here to endure the outrage of your false and cruel accusation! "

"Tut, tut, tut!" exclaimed Elmer Bring, hastily and fussily. "My dear Miss Armadale—Pansy! Pansy! Your guardian does not mean everything he says; you must make allowance for his annoyance at losing, or rather mislaying, doubtless only for a while, the trinket that he prizes.. There, there, there! Now, don't cry! " Then, turning swiftly to Gideon Abbs, he whispered, "Take care! You are going too far! Only fancy—suppose she began to talk outside!"

And with one arm he thrust back the infuriated old curmudgeon; with the other he urged the girl out of the room.

She stood there on the bare landing, trembling—in the dark, alone, wondering whether there was another girl in the world so desolate and in such darkness. She dreaded going along the eerie corridors, up the stairs with the big, black rats scuttling within the wainscot and across her path; dreaded the blank, bare room against whose rattling window the moaning cedar branches swished. But she feared still more returning down to that stone vault of a kitchen and to Jane Collins with her evil tongue —yes! and, now and then, her spiteful hands.

So she went back to what, to make her still more wretched, they had told her was the haunted room.

What wonder Gideon Abbs lost the next game and the next? How could any man play any game, he kept on crooning, knowing that his house harboured a thief, that he had been sheltering an adder that had stung him?

So the lawyer and the doctor battled with each other, neither seeming in a hurry to leave, though each kept on remarking that the hour was growing late, and each beneath his breath was muttering, "Will he never go!"

Old Abbs was pacing the room like an angry tiger, for his part muttering, "Will they never go?"

"I've nothing to ask you to drink," at last he said. "You know I keep nothing in the house except a little brandy for medicinal purposes, and that," defiantly to the lawyer, "is all run out. . . . It's getting very late. . . . Aren't you getting tired, doctor? . . . You've a long way to go, Elmer."

And just as the lawyer, perceiving that the doctor meant outstaying him, was about saying straight out he wanted a few minutes' private talk with Gideon, the doctor himself remarked: "Pray don't let me detain you, Elmer; I don't go your way, and I want to speak to Gideon.

"Well, don't be long about it," growled the miser. "And good night, Elmer. Good night—mind you put the screw on Flinders to-morrow."

Elmer Dring ran his fingers through his long, silver hair in a hesitating manner.

"Well, well!" he said. "Good night, Judex. Good night, Gideon—Jane will let me out," and he went down in the dark.

Reaching the dim-lit lobby, he glanced round. Yes, Jane Collins was gliding out of the shadows, a finger on her lip.

She whispered to him—finally he said: "Stay. I want you only to pretend to let me out ; I must speak to the old man when that mad, mad-doctor's gone."

Meantime, Judex Esslin, fixing his vulture gaze upon the withered, wizened miser, was warning him not to carry tyranny too far with that girl; though it is regrettable to confess that his advice was prompted less by chivalry than prudence.

"It is not safe, my friend—it is not safe."

"Then am I to be plundered by an outcast I have sheltered?"

"Tut, tut! In the first place I doubt if she has stolen what you have lost. In the second, if she has, she has been driven to it by starvation, incipient kleptomania. Thirdly, my friend, suppose you were to prosecute her—how are you to answer certain questions?"

"Wait till the time comes," snarled the old man. "Until then, suppose you mind your own business "That's just what I am doing."

"What do you mean?" the old man asked, wrathfully, suspiciously.

"This—and it is to tell you this I stayed: Pansy Armadale is now a woman. Before another year has gone I mean to make her Mrs. Esslin."

"What?" The old man, leaning against the table broke into a mocking laugh that shook his sides an swelled into a hacking cough that shook them eve more, and when at length he had recovered gravity and breath, he said, opening the door: "Go on Get out!"

"Very well," said the other; "only remember that is my destination. Half a loaf is better than no bread. Which would you rather disgorge of on parcel you have plundered—half or the whole Steady!" for the old man's bony hand was moving towards the tongs. "Think it over!"

He vanished in the darkness of the staircase. The old man on the landing listened to his descending footsteps—to the closing of the big door, the click of the lock, the rattle of the chain.

"The thief ! The traitor! " he hissed, between his remaining fangs. "Oh, what a wicked world it is! Full—full—full of thieves!"

Suddenly he started at the recollection that he had not heard Jane bolt the door downstairs. He crossed the room to call to her. Then suddenly started, and gasped convulsively: "You! What's brought you back?" for there again stood Elmer Bring.

"I want another word with you—about Flinders; I want you to extend his time."

"I won't—I won't. You shall foreclose tomorrow. Why, man, what do you mean? What are you standing wool-gathering there for? Come! out with it !"

"I can't foreclose. He brought the money this day last week. I—I've mixed it with my own in an investment—I—I can't get it in for a few days—a week—ten days."

"You've done what! I know—I guessed you had my money. You've given up my deeds, you've sunk it in one of your wild-cat speculations. But you don't play that game with me; you don't rob me, you thief! Oh, what a wicked world it is! Now don't stop here to argue; you know I never go back on my word. Go—go! "

He thrust forth his bony hand; the other slowly disappeared back in the gloom. The old man sank into a chair gasping with agitation. He sat there ■ listening to the descending footsteps; to the rattle of the chain, the click of the lock, the thud of the bolts.

Then, when his heart had ceased its gallop, he rose, doused the light, and himself went out on to the landing.

Over the stair-head he called: "Jane Collins! Put out that light. Don't waste my gas at two and eleven a thousand. No wonder I'm so poor !"

"All right, sir!"

The glimmer there below was swallowed in the dark. In the dark the old man climbed one flight of stairs, turned along a corridor, groping his way with sense of touch keener than the sight of many eyes, and so reached the end of the passage, mumbling and snarling: "What a wicked world! What a wicked—wicked world! "

And all of a sudden he quivered from head to heel, uttered a gurling, inarticulate cry that sank into a moan, then collapsed and went down in a heap— there in the dark !

Clear, cold, and blue the moonlight flooded all the land—and into that flood of silver light Pansy Armadale through an unlatched latticed window crept out of the Lone House—and the dark.

"We find," the foreman of the jury deliberately answered, "that the old chap—beg pardon—the deceased, was wilfully murdered on the night in question by some person or persons unknown— and that is the verdict of us all." ("Hold your row!") The last three words in an audible whisper to a fidgety fellow-juror, whom he had brought back into the jury-box under his especial wing.

"After the evidence of Jane Collins and Doctor Esslin?" the coroner remarked—and the fidgety juror gave vent to a deep, expressive "Ah! " eloquent of much contention before he had reluctantly acquiesced in the verdict of the majority.

The coroner dismissed them with a glance intended to be withering and principally concentrated on the juror who had stood out strenuously for a verdict of "Wilful Murder" against Pansy Armadale, until overcome by the protestations and derision of his comrades, an intense craving for liquid and solid refreshment and a thorough weariness of the whole proceedings.

When, later on, he recounted these things to his wife, her look was even more withering than the coroner's.

"You weather-cock!" she said. "If the girl was innocent, why did she run away?"

"Just what I said, my dear. I p'inted out doctor'd said she weren't 'sponsible for her actions— but they would have it that, seeing the number of poor souls old Gideon had brought to bankruptcy and ruin, there was no telling who might or might not have been driven to desperation by him. One thing they never would allow—that a sweet, tender hearted creature like Miss Pansy could do a thing like that."

Whereupon the wife of his bosom reiterated viciously that men were fools in ordinary, but when a slip of a girl with a doll's face was in question they were bigger fools than ever.

For the next nine days the popularity of Dassborough divided itself mainly into two sections, the pro- and anti-Pansy Armadales—the latter faction being mainly feminine, the former contending sturdily that, even if the girl's hand dealt the fatal blow, she had been doubtless goaded to it by her wretched guardian's tyranny, and that his blood lay on his own head.

Still they stubbornly declined to be convinced that in this instance flight was tantamount to guilt, contending that it was as natural for such a girl to run away from such a man as for a dove to escape if possible the beak and talons of a cormorant; and so the time elapsed, the wonder slackened, and still no warrant had been issued for the apprehension of Pansy Armadale.

For one thing, there was no known relative at hand to initiate proceedings. As for friends, Gideon left none—those who had known him best had hated him worst.

No will was to be found, Elmer Dring declaring his conviction that Abbs had left none. Certainly he had consistently refused to let him draw one— probably because he knew his man.

"It does seem such a pity." he said to Judex Esslin, "for a fat estate, gathered with such zeal and industry by our dear friend, to fall to pieces for the want of a securing hand."

"So I suppose you want to get it into your grasp; it'll be secure enough then."

"In the interests of justice, certainly I, as creditor in respect of certain bills of costs, am thinking of administering the estate."

"Come off your perch," said Judex. "What about me? Once a week for years the old hunks has lured me to his den to play chess, and worm out of me, free gratis, advice and prescriptions for his bronchitis and lumbago. Why, with his ailments and his means, he ought to have been an income to me."

"Same as the old vaga—I mean our lamented friend, served me," said Dring, viciously. "He'd sound me on a dozen points, and if I charged a single six-and-eightpence, call me a thief for claiming a fee for a social chat and what he called his hospitality—one tablespoonful of whisky all the evening.

"But, fortunately, I've kept a record of my attendances, and I suppose you can compile a list of your visits and medicine supplies for some years past on a liberal scale?" Here Elmer's left eyelid gently drooped. "Meantime, we may as well gather up anything of any value lying loose about—it would be such a pity to let anything garnered by our dear friend fall into evil hands. He couldn't take it with him."

"And if he had, it would have melted," and Jane Collins's thin lips snapped viciously at the remark.

And then and there they sketched the outline of their plan. Their claims compiled, Elmer was to throw the estate into Chancery on behalf of himself and all other creditors, get Judex appointed receiver, and—well, in this instance, the supply might create the demand.

The three were all agreed upon the admirable nature of the arrangement,, and were about on the point of instituting an elaborate inspection of the Lone House.

Jane Collins smiled. As if that had not been already done! As if strange things had not been already found in strange places—and others placed to be found thereafter in other places.

"Where do I come in, Elmer?" the writhing, thin lips asked.

"Why, of course, you will prefer your claim— your well-substantiated claim—for services and disbursements—out-of-pocket payments for all sorts of matters—mind, for many years. I, as administrator, shall admit that claim.'' "Come, sir—who are you, and what do you mean, sir, by practically forcing your way into these premises?"

"Suppose I ask the same question of you?" replied the other.

And Elmer Dring for a moment shifted uneasily before the gaze of a square-cut face with resolute, set jaws, a mouth of iron, and eyes riveted on his own face in a scintillating gaze.

"My name is Elmer Dring, and I may as well inform you I am a solicitor of the Supreme Court."

"Is that so—and were you old Gideon's lawyer?"

"I had the honour of advising the late Mr. Abbs, since you are so inquisitive, young man," spluttered Elmer Dring.

And the imperturbable new-comer responded: "So? Well, just now let me advise you. Don't try to use me for a doormat—I'm not built that way."

"But who are you, and what do you want?" sharply inquired Jane Collins, and Judex Esslin, with a significant glance to each of his two companions, tapped his forehead and shook his head in pitying despondency.

"I think you're right this time," remarked Elmer Dring. "It sounds like it, anyway."

But the new arrival remarked cheerfully, "No, you've guessed wrong." And, pulling off his gloves, he threw them on to the table beside his hat and stick—then facing them squarely, said: "To cut the cackle and come to cues, I may just as well tell you my name is Harvey Darrell. I am the heir-at-law and next-of-kin of Gideon Abbs deceased—and I have come to stay. But first, to put a seal on every door, and lock and lid, inside this house."

On—on—on she pressed, she knew not whither cared not, except that now and then she threw a scared look behind to assure herself; the handful of chimneys clustered round the steeple was looming tinier against the night sky, and her pace slackened only when the lanes and roads grew stranger.

She thanked the kind, white moon for lighting her way; she was so glad to breathe the sweet, fresh, summer night-air outside, and every minute farther from the hated walls of the Lone House, that at times she sang!

Only when she had traversed miles and miles, and crossed not merely parochial, but county borders, she realised that her feet, yes! and her eyelids, were growing heavier—and at times she would seat herself upon a milestone and snatch a minute's rest.

Then on again, now and then climbing a stile, and, just for variety, leaving the hard, wide road for a bridle-path across fields glistening with diamond dew, the path sometimes leading through the gloom of coppices under arches made of overhanging trees; now and then she would be startled by a hare or other living thing scuttling across her path; and the trees began to take fantastic shapes, to stretch out gaunt, menacing arms, and she was glad to emerge from the tunnel of interlacing boughs —gladder still, though colder, when the dark began to lift to grey, and up from the horizon there stole a faint, suffusing light, growing from grey to lilac, then less faint, to crimson and to gold, and the twittering in the woods told that the birds were waking.

And she was wanting to be sleeping; and, by-and-by, the pathway she had followed just round the bend was checked abruptly by a stream, and for the life of her she could not toil back through that eerie, dreary coppice, past the goblin trees, to find again the highroad.

Close by—oh, Heaven! there was a hayrick, one side of it all tumbled; and into the sweet-smelling mound she crept for rest and warmth—and just as dawn was rising bright and golden, and the twittering of the song-birds was swelling to full-throated rapture, she sank with a sigh into delicious slumber.

"Austen Lisle, confound you, sir! What do you think of yourself, sir? Do you know, Mr. Lisle, it's beginning to strike me that you are more than, and worse than, incorrigible—you are callous. Consider, when you ought to be eating your heart out in the Temple for briefs that won't come, here you are betaking yourself with your rods and tackle, your easel, your bicycle, and your Kodak, down into this drowsy, dear old country dale, instead of righteously grinding and groaning and drudging and despairing—enjoying life as though you'd retired from a judgeship in all your pristine juvenility."

Here the fanner and the object of the indictment paused to refil and light his pipe. Then resumed the arraignment: "Furthermore, sir, even here your perverted nature still asserts itself, and you flout and mock remorse! Realty, Austen Lisle, after sitting into the small hours, in the company of jovial graziers and yeomen fanners, to say nothing of mine host of the 'Come and Welcome,' smoking much tobacco, drinking mayhap too much punch, joining in lusty choruses and 'thumping the dominoes' till the feet and hearts of your boon companions were set a-dancing, you should of rights be seeking your belated rest with a racking brain, a heavy heart, and a conscience bowed down by remorse.

"But shame upon you! here you are feeling as fit as a three-year-old, as chirpy as the dear little dicky birds who seem to be singing for your delectation, absolutely glorying in the dissipation that has kept you out of doors to watch the golden lances of the morning rout the dark hosts of night, the feathery green of the springtime boughs gleaming through the vanishing mists, and the dawnlight kissing the bosom of the sleeping stream to gold. Austen, you're past praying for."

And out of the very gladness of his youthful heart and the exuberance of the joy of life at one-and-twenty, as he strode along beside the stream he was longing to be whipping once again, he broke into the chorus, and his voice—young, strong, and clear —rang clarion-like upon the spring morning air: '"Twas the sound of his horn brought me from my bed, And the cry of his hounds that he ofttimes led, And his view hallo-oho—who—who—oop ! that would waken-------"

"Oh!"

Something started up from the mound beside the broken rick. Austen Lisle started nearly into the stream.

"Good Lord! What is it?"

And then—"Why! it's a girl ! "

And so it was, and a pretty girl to wit. And instinctively he doffed his tweed hat with a cheerful "Good-morning. I hope I didn't startle you? I am afraid I woke you up."

"Yes, you did," said the girl, with both hands j disentangling the hay from her hair. "But I am not angry with you; on the contrary, I am very much obliged. I've been—oh, dear! " she yawned, "lying here quite long enough."

"But, excuse me," stammered Austen—"of course it's no affair of mine—but it seems rather extra-ordinary to find a young lady at this time of the day-"

"Sleeping in a hay-rick—I know—I know; but, I assure you, I never enjoyed a nap more in my life."

"But don't you think it was rather risky? Suppose, for instance, a tramp of the wrong sort were to come along?"

"Oh, they wouldn't hurt me, surely; and I've nothing they could steal."

"Then, again, the rats---"

"Oh!"

She sprang up with a scream and scuttled out of her improvised al fresco couch, brushing her skirts and gathering them round her ankles.

"How long have you been lying there? " he asked. And she answered: "Not very long."

"What brought you out so early?"

"I might ask the same question."

"Oh, but I—I haven't been to bed. I've been sitting up with a friend—who was rather poorly."

This was literally true in respect of one grass farmer.

"How good of you I " she said. "Good-morning— and thank you for not letting me oversleep myself."

"But, I say—which way are you going?"

She passed her hand across her brow with a puzzled air, then asked: "Which way are you?"

"Oh, I'm off to my digs. I'm staying at Widow Meldrum's cottage in the village yonder."

He pointed to the left, along the tow-path of the stream.

"Really! " she answered. "I'm going this way," and she moved along to the right with a pleasant nod.

He watched her curiously.

"How very strange!" he said. "Quite a girl and quite a lady—though what brings her here at this time in the morning? Not particularly smart. Her boots were all dusty and grimed. By jingo! I believe that girl's been up all night."

And watching her, he kept on wondering why? Had she had a row at home, and flown out in a whirlwind of hysteria? He watched her pause at the foot of the rustic bridge, as if undecided which way to take.

He called out: "I say, miss!" and, as if that decided her, she stepped on to its planks to cross.

And he, knowing that within twenty-four hours one of those planks had loosened and had not been yet repaired, hurried after her.

"Here, miss, you musn't cross there. It's dangerous."

But his following, instead of delaying only hurried her. She broke into a run.

"Stop! stop!" he shouted.

Too late! She had stepped on to the loosened plank—her foot turned with it. Frantically she clutched at a twisted rail, missed it, stumbled, then fell, grasped with one hand the rough edge of the gangway.

And with all her weight upon that feeble, slipping grasp, there she lay suspended—with terror dilated eyes gazing into the deep, still waters which almost kissed her paling lips.

"Confound the girl!"

His words were far less gallant than his action; for, just in time, he dashed up and caught her ere her grip of the bridge planking had quite relaxed. Then, gathering her up in his arms, he carried her, "since she wanted to cross, to the other bank.

Her heart still beating violently and her face still white, she said, in a trembling voice: "How brave and good of you—I might have been drowned ! "

"Didn't you hear me shout!"

"Yes, I didn't know what you meant," she answered, in confusion, feeling some diffidence in explaining, to this good fellow who had saved her from, at the least, a dangerous ducking, that she had mistaken his call for inquisitiveness, if not impertinence.

So acute indeed the distress of her confusion seemed that, being a gentleman, Austen Lisle said: "Never mind, all's well that ends well. I'm glad it was no worse. Good-morning."

"Thanks again for saving most likely my life," she answered, "and good-bye." So rarely had she cause for being grateful that the very joy of emotion lit up her violet eyes beneath the sweeping lashes, and Austen Lisle could never forget their light.

"Good-bye," he said, "and good luck!"

"Thanks once again," she answered, realising how she needed it.

Across the fields bright with summer's sheen of green and gold she went, the young man's eyes following her with softening gaze.

"Extraordinary young person," he muttered; "and extraordinarily good-looking—with those fine eyes of hers. She's limping—poor little girl! I suppose her ankle turned with that wretched plank."

He was inclined to ask if he could be of further aid, but she had clambered over the stile in the hedgegap and was gone.

He had guessed right. Her ankle had twisted with the plank, and with every step the pain of it grew more acute. Still she pressed on—the sun came up strong and fierce, and the roads gleamed aggressively and dustily, and the hot pain throbbed within the dull numbness of the heavy, swollen ankle.

Her eyes ached with the dust and glare; these, too, parched her throat till she thought of Dives in the post purple and fine linen period with even more compassion than she had felt for Lazarus in the ante mortem. And she was hungry, not with the hearty, healthy appetite whence spring pleasures of anticipation, but with the faint, sickly, sinking yearning of endurance overtaxed.

"Cruel sun to shine so, unfeeling birds to sing so, when I, who love you so dearly, am so sad!" she murmured, piteously.

Out of the dusky white, ceaselessly glaring road she turned into a winding lane sheltered by overhanging boughs, through which the sun threw a waving lacework on the grassy path. Just round the bend she paused to glance across the gate of the sweetest cottage she had ever seen.

A trim, bright grass plot stretched from that gate to a verandah smothered with clustering roses, honeysuckle, and wistaria, framing the latticed , casements blinking sleepily right up to the thatched roof, along whose eaves a brood of fantail pigeons roo-cooed and strutted—to the right the trimmest, fullest of box hedges, and to the left a red brick wall covered with apricots, peaches, and other fruits, made two sides of the quadrangle, swarms of velvet bees humming around five beehives ranged at the foot of that right-hand side.

Pansy leaned against that gate to wrench off the boot she could no longer bear, and because it all looked so cool, so sweet, and so happy; and she was so done up, dusty, and weary, and in such soul- racking pain, she burst into a flood of tears. And a prim little elderly lady, surely made to match that prim little elderly house, and who from the ambush of a summerhouse had been watching Pansy, came bustling out to the gate, exclaiming: "Why, bless the child! what is vexing you? and why don't you put your boot on? Oh, dear, dear, dear! what a silly soul I am! Of course you can't; you've sprained your ankle. Job Wattles—Job Wattles! Bless the man—where is he?"

" 'Ere Oi be, ma'am," and a shock-headed, bow-legged, round-shouldered gardener dropped a cuttings-laden barrow with a thud.

"Now, Job, lend a hand here! This poor young lady is in great pain; you must help her to the house, and I must bind up that poor swollen ankle. Oh, dear, dear! she's going to faint."

Pansy coming to, found herself lying on a chintz-covered couch in the cool and pleasant morning-room opening on to the lawn, beside her a tray laden liberally with milk and honey, and, looking down, she realised that her foot was swathed in fine linen rags soaked in oils, comforting and cold.

"Now, child," said the little Good Samaritan lady, "if you'll tell me your destination, when you have got rested, Job Wattles shall put the pony-chaise to and drive you."

Pansy reflected vaguely, then answered quite frankly: "I haven't any."

"But your home?"

"I haven't any."

"But what are you going to do?"

"Thank you so much. Now that I am rested I will be getting on my journeyi"

"Your journey? Where are you going—what are you seeking?"

"A situation as governess, shop-girl, maid-of-all-work—anything. I can sew and scrub, and I know French and German and something of music."

"Your parents?"

The lips quivered, and it was left to the moistening eyes to tell that she had none.

"Poor child! " said the dear little old lady. "May I ask your name, dear?"

"Pansy Armadale," she had answered not very distinctly before the second thought had flashed across her brain.

"Pansy Alma Dale? I like Alma, and the pansy is my favourite flower. Will you play something, Miss Dale?"

Pansy, deeming it just as well not to correct the misunderstanding as to her name, and only too glad of any opportunity to express her gratitude, limped across to the piano.

Job Wattles, without, ceased for a moment straining at the huge roller and listened to what seemed to him all the throstles in all the world joining in one bewildering burst of harmony, and then to one inimitable solo by the rarest songster of them all, and, after that, he wondered—was he dreaming, or were white-robed angels floating in the rainbow light flooding through the stained windows of the old church aisle, calling him to lay down life's bowed and stunted shell and join their song? The music, dying, merged into the humming of the bees, Job was back on earth again, bowed with the burden of his mortality.

Through the open windows floated on the summer sunshine madam's voice within the cool and darkened room, and she was saying: "Child, make this your home; stay and make me happy with your music."

And Pansy stayed.

And a year flew by.

"The best laid schemes o' mice an' men gang aft agley," said Bobbie Bums, who was something of a philospher and considerably more of a poet: And Elmer Dring, who was neither, expressed himself to the like effect. The old man at the Lone House had only been tolerable as a client contributing largely to Elmer's practice, particularly his sharp practice, and the latter had always looked forward confidently to the time when, having shuffled off the mortal coil, the miser would have left his hoard to Elmer's manipulation.

But if the old man was a trial, the young man at the Lone House was a terror such as Elmer never yet before had met, and hoped never to meet again. First the lawyer tried bluff—bounce. Harvey Darrell gripped him by the collar, twisted him round, slung him down the steps.

Elmer threatened all the terrors of the law. Darrell threatened the duckweed-covered pond.

The lawyer, relying on his craft, flew to the armoury of his profession, and found himself as an archer pitted against a marksman armed with a Lee-Enfield.

He had trespassed at his own risk; the owner was within his legal right.

Title? The onus probandi lay upon the trespasser, not but what Darrell's title was unassailable, open to all the world to challenge; and when the newcomer, scorning other aid, appeared in person, and in this strain defied all others, particularly Elmer Dring, Dasborough held its breath, astounded.

Its bench decided in his favour, and Elmer Dring slunk back to his den a cowed and beaten man, aghast with dread of what might happen should this aggressive whipper-snapper happen on the clues to sundry transactions, particularly certain matters of account, and take the initiative. Dangerous in defence, what would he be on the offensive?

"If I were a younger man you wouldn't call me names," said Elmer, vindictively, as Harvey passed him on the Court steps.

"No, I'd flog you," replied the other, lighting a cigar, And the new arrival at the Lone House was certainly on the right way to bringing things to light. From upstairs and downstairs, from top , to bottom the Lone House was ransacked, every drawer, door, and lid flung or wrenched open, every crook and cranny scoured and ransacked, the very wainscots and panelling ripped open, the flooring and the rafters torn up and down and rummaged.

Wondrous stories were afloat concerning the treasures and the mysteries brought to light, losing nothing in the telling; sea-chests, clamped with rusty iron, stowed with glittering gold doubloons and such like quaint old bullion, precious stones whose lustre, swathed in cobwebs and hidden in dark comers for decades, suddenly dragged to light, dazzled astounded beholders with their scintillating fire; whole sheaves of notes', moist and mildewed.

The heart stood still, the brain reeled, the mouth watered to think of the wondrous treasure-trove young Fortunatus was gathering in the dreary old ramshackle house. Needless to say these fired not only the imagination but cupidity of some.

Begging letters, claims on the justice or the generosity of the heir, arrived in sacks, and in sacks went away as waste-paper, the heir openly contracting with his butterman for same.

"It would be a shame to waste all that labour—a very great shame," he laughed.

One night three forms with masked faces and list-slippered feet scaled the now trimmer wall and hedge, smothering with difficulty remarks aroused by unsuspected meshes of barbed wire. In the dark one blundered across a line of same and plunged into that stagnant fountain basin; whereupon his language also would not admit of publication. His comrades, meantime, prising a sash, set all of a sudden a hundred bells a-ringing! The trio, turning to flee, scuttled like rabbits through the dark— save one, pinned, hurled to earth by a dun Great Dane with cavernous jaws and dragon fangs. Nor had his comrades gone far through the dark—before a blaze of light and a shot rang out.

One fell, a bullet in his shoulder; and the other would have fallen before the crashing blow between the eyes, but that his neck was gripped as in a vice, while his captor, in a short, sharp voice, called : out: "I've got this one, sergeant! Clap the bracelets 'on him! Ha, ha, ha! we've bagged the three! Glad I was at home when you called, gentlemen. Do you know 'em, sergeant?"

And the sergeant answered: "Yes, Mr. Darrell; my chap will go back for another seven years; the other will be lucky if he gets off with ten; this chap's a new hand."

"Yes, s'elp me, gov'nor!" exclaimed the unfortunate, shivering wretch Darrell himself had collared, "s'elp me! it's the first time I've been on the crook."

"And bowled first ball! "

Shaking him like a rat, he dragged him in his herculean grasp towards the open gate into the black shadow of the cedar.

'"Go on, then, take another chance!" he said. '"Get out of it!" and, propelled by a heavy hand and a heavier boot, the terrified tyro flew through the black night like a hare that had just slipped the hounds.

"Let him go, sir?"

"I couldn't help it, sergeant; he's been in the pond, and he was so slimy, and, above all, he hummed so, I couldn't hold him."

Dr. Esslin thought fit to adopt a neutral attitude in respect of the questions between Dring and Darrell—these being no concern of his; besides which there was his own claim to be satisfied, and the result of the lawyer's tactics offered no inducement to their adoption.

Furthermore, he intimated to Mr. Dring he was curiously interested in diagnosing Harvey Darrell's case, classifying his peculiar form of mental aberration, as to the existence of which he entertained no doubt whatever, probably regarding as one unequivocal symptom the circumstance that Darrell had paid his bill for attendance on the late Gideon Abbs without demur.

"It is sometimes less expensive to be robbed than to kick against, you know," said Darrell, handing Jane Collins the doctor's bill, with cheque in full annexed, and instructions to bring back a receipt.

The grey-green eyes glanced furtively across at the square, resolute, far-from-bad-looking face, then shifted before the steely look of her new master's.

Everything about this man betokened strength of body, mind, and purpose; the dark hair curling close, the well-shaped forehead, the alert movement of the long, lithe limbs, the keen, dilated nostrils, and the iron mouth.

Strangely enough, Jane Collins had elected to stay on at the Lone House. She had reasoned that, even in the event of certain discoveries being made it would perhaps be safer to be upon the spot, while possibly being present she might avert, or at all events retard, those discoveries.

Thirdly, she herself wanted to find out something. It was certainly marvellous how thoroughly and systematically Harvey Darrell went to work in overhauling his new possessions, the way he gripped matters of involved account, and nosed out the ramifications of the old usurer's affairs.

"The old man lent seven thousand pounds on a mortgage of Flinders's farm. Where are the deeds?" Jane could not tell; that is, she did not. But she gave Elmer Dring warning that hounds had got the scent. Harvey Darrell, seeking Farmer Flinders, was confronted with the release signed by Gideon Abbs and duly attested, also with Elmer Dring's receipt on the mortgagee's behalf for the repaid money, principal, interest, and costs.

Where was the money? He searched the old man's ledgers; then he sought Elmer Dring, but, when the hounds drew cover, the fox was gone away.

Elmer Dring had taken a holiday abroad.

Harvey Darrell whistled softly and made notes— and went on rummaging. And so lighted upon an item of five thousand pounds, very definitely earmarked. He traced it through various entries, invested on one date in Consols, later realised and re-invested in cable, railway, and other stock, a while in goldfields, then Westralians, and always growing and growing.

"Armadale—Armadale? Who was Armadale?" he presently asked Jane Collins.

"I don't exactly know," she answered, repressing a start.

"I don't want to know exactly," he answered. "Tell me all you know about him."

"He was a friend of master's."

"Ah! Master was a friend of his—took care of what he entrusted to him, eh?"

"Perhaps so, sir."

The tray trembled in her hands.

"Good. His property, securities, eh, Jane? Do you know what he entrusted to him?"

"How should I, sir, being no scholar and only a servant?"

"But there are servants and—confidential servants, Jane. However, I wouldn't have you tax your memory unduly. Just about as much lithia as whisky, thanks. Hallo! what's this?"

Out of a bundle of papers written in fading ink there slipped the portrait of a very little girl, neither the tumbling curls nor the smile quite faded out.

"What a cheerful kid! Who's this, Jane?"

"I—I don't know, sir."

He turned it over.

"Pansy I Why, of course, Pansy Armadale— that was the girl they spoke of at the inquest, the girl, who helped in the kitchen, the girl who went away, no one quite knew when or where. Did you know, Jane?"

"If you've read about the inquest you'll know I swore I didn't."

"Of course I know, but I'm asking you. Never mind! she looks as if she'd grow up pretty. Did she?"

"Of course not," snapped Jane, with more than ordinary animation. "Don't pretty children always grow up plain?"

"Really, I haven't noticed. Were you a very nice child, Jane? Now I suppose this little person was part of the trust confided to the late unlamented Gideon Abbs. How frequently the wolf is set to guard the lamb! Well, well—for the present, we'll let 'In re' Armadale rest."

He lit a cigar—paced the room that had been the miser's sanctum sanctorum, the centre of the maze, the innermost mesh of the old spider's web.

"I'm going to refurnish," he said, "when I've rearranged. As for the old lumber here, now I've overhauled most of it, I think----" He paused.

"If it's in the way I'd get somebody to clear it out for you, sir."

"I daresay lots of folks would do that, Jane, ramshackle as it is."

"And I daresay I could get a price for it, sir, better than you'd get; brokers always beat down gentlemen."

"Do they? Then we'll beat up the brokers. No, we won't; I have a better notion. For the present I'll stack it in the lumber attics."

The pale, thin lips writhed even more than usual. "Yes, sir," said Jane. "Oh, by the bye, I was going to ask, sir, if you'd let me have some little keepsake of my poor old master, something that would remind me of him. Nothing of value, sir— the old, worn-out chair there that he dozed in so many years. P'r'aps as you're going to clear the things out you'd let me take it now, sir."

Her new master, pulling at the cigar in silence, looked intently at Jane—then at the chair—then again at Jane.

"I'll think it over," he said.

"It isn't much of a favour for an old servant. I'd—I'd give you a price for it, more than you'd get from the brokers, sir—more than it's worth." "I'll think it over," he repeated, recommencing his sentry go, and as he turned his eye lit on one box as yet not rummaged. A workbox. In a moment he had snatched it up. It was locked. With a chisel he had ever at hand for such purposes he prised it open, so swiftly, so deftly, that the woman's sandy eyebrows knitted. Then he cried; "Hallo! what's here? Needles, pins, kerchief, bobbins, reels. By Jove! another portrait! A portrait of a girl. By the Lord Harry I what a girl ! " And, rapt and spellbound for some moments, he regarded the photograph held in his palm.

Cheap, somewhat crude, the work of an itinerant camera-bearer, and beneath it was written in a girl's hand a recent date, and—Pansy Armadale!

"Why," he said, in a tone of strange exultation, "this is the child grown to a girl, almost a woman— and such a woman! The bud burst into bloom."

"Yes," hissed Jane Collins, "that's the girl—the photographer gave her one for herself to let him take one for—his gallery, he called it."

"She's very beautiful."

"There's no telling by photographs," snarled Jane. "Sometimes the plainest people come out pretty, and best-looking plain."

"You'd make a good photo! You didn't like the young lady, Jane?—I shan't require you any more to-night."

"I hated her," said Jane; "I wish, for all they said, I'd spoken out. You won't forget the chair, sir?" and she closed the door behind her.

"I will not forget the chair, Jane," he said, softly, when the door had closed behind her.

For some moments he sat rapt in contemplation of the portrait, which after a while he placed in his breast-pocket.

"I will by no means forget the chair," he repeated. Rising and stooping over that article of furniture, and, opening a knife keen as a razor, he sliced and slashed its cushion and its padding, ripped out the horsehair and the wadding, groping with both hands all over it. And at last moved and , clutched something which rustled crisply.

"Just what I thought!" he said. "Come out!"

From within the bowels of the seat he withdrew a canvas bag, dragged its mouth wide open, and his eyes lit up, for it was full of banknotes and Treasury notes in neat wads.

And then from amongst the wads tumbled a foolscap document, folded otherwise, and endorsed "Last Will and Testament of Gideon Abbs."

"Bingo! Bingo! Here, sir!" Pansy's fresh young voice rang clear and sweet across the lawn. "How dare you scamper across the flower-beds! What do you think little birds care for you, sir? I am surprised at your letting them make you look so ridiculous! "

The broad-chested, brindled bulldog of ferocious aspect, whom most persons held in awe, lumbered across the lawn, and snuffling, snorting, fawned at her feet.

"Just like 'im and just like 'er!" meditated Job Wattles, seated on the handle of his wheelbarrow and puffing at his cutty pipe. "For all his ugly looks it's only ugly characters as need be afeared of 'im, tramps and wagroms and such-like. She is too good and sweet to be afeared of anything or anybody, brute or human."

"Quite right, Job Wattles—quite right," said Miss Nepean, equipped in sun hat, garden gloves and all the panoply of horticulture, clipping a box-hedge as prim and trim as herself.

It was Job Wattles's habit to think aloud, and hers to enter into conversation he often thus unconsciously commenced.

Summer had come again, but Pansy, so far from having departed, had become, to all appearance, a more permanent fixture at Homecroft.

"Whatever should we do without her?"

"Lardy, marm! that's what I often thinks of, 'cause sure enough we can't expect her to stop with us much longer."

"Good gracious, man, what nonsense you're talking! What do you mean?" the prim little old lady with the silver hair snapped, looking as severe as with her was possible through her gold-rimmed glasses.

And Job answered: "Why, lor' bless yer, marm, lookee at them ripe red apples over the orchard hedge. D'ye expect them ain't goin' to be gathered, or if they ain't gathered the birds won't be pickin' at 'em?

"These here is quiet parts, with few folks about, and them mostly quiet 'uns, but whenever I drives you and Miss Pansy, whether to church on Sundays or into Conington on market-days, ain't all the young fellows' eyes a-following our chaise, and if some of the young chaps in church was to pay as much attention to the parson as they do to Miss Pansy's pretty picture of a face it would be better for their peace of mind."

"Tut! tut! Job Wattles—Miss Pansy is far too sensible to think of such nonsense."

"In course, marm," said Job Wattles, subsiding. "Girls at her age generally is."

And as he trundled his barrow along the path, Nannie Nepean, resuming active clip-clipping, mused: "I suppose Job's right— he generally is, drat the man! and I shall have to make up my mind to lose my dearie some day." And for the moment a chill fell on her gentle heart—just such a chill as might have fallen had she seen that face peering across her garden wicket, the face of a seedy, elderly, somewhat obese individual, regarding intently the girl in muslin scolding the bulldog.

"Surely it can't be the girl!—no such luck for me! And yet—why, yes! There's no other face in the world like the one shaded by that summer hat. It's Pansy!—Pansy! and I'm within sight and scent of clover after all."

"Pansy—Pansy! "

Why, yes! the call of the little old lady clipping the hedge confirmed it—and he chuckled audibly, unheeded by the girl who skipped across the green to her dear benefactress.

Not so by Bingo, the brindled bull, who, swirling quickly round and catching a glimpse of the flabby face, that in an instant disappeared, stampeded madly towards the wicket, over lawn, flower-beds and all, and, in spite of the remonstrances of his two divinities, dashed across and flung himself against the wicket, baying, yelping, snorting, snarling furiously, clamouring as plainly as canine expression would permit, "Let me get at him—let me tear him limb from limb! "

But Elmer Dring had shuffled along the grassy lane and round the bend; then, until at last well screened by the flowering dog-rose, clambered hawthorn, he paused to take stock—and notes.

"Brute of a dog! " he mumbled ; "I loathe dogs— they're always so beastly suspicious of me. I'd like to strangle that one. No, no! that would involve considerable risk; but I'd like to just lure him to friendship with a nice savoury morsel wrapped round a dose of prussic acid! But what a bit of luck, to happen on that girl!

"And by such a fluke, after all the pains and trouble I've taken, all in vain! Now to find out all about her, and all about the elderly party. That little old woman with the silver hair and the gold glasses seems to me to suggest wealth—wealth that very possibly Pansy has the handling of, and that, if she has, I must handle, too—or else there's going to be bad luck for Pansy!"

He made his way along the lanes to a cluster of red tiled and thatched roofs, and to one quaint old house in the midst of them in front of which swung and creaked the sign of "The Jolly Haymakers," he entered the sanded floored taproom and called for a mug of ale.

He was accorded the time-honoured rustic greeting, that is to say each member of the company joining in the general chorus of "Good-mar'n, zur! " and forthwith emptying his mug, replaced it with an eloquent thump upon the ring-stained trestle table. The replenishing of these mugs was an infallible avenue to conversation, and ere long Elmer Dring had brought that conversation round to the cottage and occupants.

Oh, ay! they knawed Homecroft, Miss Nepean's place, and her, too, bless her heart! And the company set off each in turn with some anecdote illustrating the little old maid's goodness of heart and gentleness alike to human and to brute—a sick child saved by badly-needed nourishment, a struggling debtor set on his legs, an ailing woman nursed back to life, a despairing wrong-doer given pardon and another chance; each and all had some such tale to tell of her.

And Elmer Dring, subtly leading the conversation to means, those present testified abundantly to her vast fortune, her gorgeous plate, her priceless jewels. For all she lived so simple and secluded a life; why, squire himself had declared in public that she gave in charity more than he expended in the upkeep of the Hall per annum.

Casual questions as to her household elicited information as to Job Wattles, a good sort but 'mazin' bigoted against getting drunk; Martha, the cook, who scolded and worshipped her mistress; Julia, the parlourmaid, a bouncing girl, and Miss Dale, who had arrived at Homecroft just a year ago—none knew whence—and whom Nannie Nepean treated as a child of her own, and no wonder since what a hangel she were.

Dale? What a transparent incognito Pansy had adopted! Elmer chuckled in his sleeve!

Between the lights that evening, lying in wait, he encountered her gathering wild flowers in that grassy, leafy lane.

She stood still when accosted, deeming it was some tramp who had seen better days, but when he called her by her name the rose tint fled from her cheeks.

"Who are you, and what can I do for you?" she asked.

"You'll have to do a lot," he answered, "or else there's a bad time coming.- You know who I am! "

She scanned him intently.

No, no! That seedy, shabby, flabby old man could not be the once sleek, unctuous, venerable Elmer Dring; but as if in answer to her unspoken expostulation, he snarled: "I'm Elmer Dring!"

"I'm so sorry," she faltered; and he snarled: "Daresay you are—in lots of ways."

"What can I do for you?" asked Pansy, feeling that a black cloud had suddenly obscured the sky a little while ago so blue.

"Lots," he answered. "I'm thinking which way's best; there's so many. You might, for instance, introduce me at Homecroft as your dear long-lost father."

"But you are not," Pansy replied, joyfully.

And he went on with a glare: "I hear you pay all the accounts; you might get me one of the old girl's cheques already signed— rest of it blank, for preference."

Her eyes dilated as she listened, and he continued: "Then, again, I hear the old girl's got no end of jewellery. Well, nothing would be easier than for you to pass out a parcel of it on the q.t. Why— what's the matter?"

"I don't know," Pansy exclaimed, white and palpitating. "It seems to me I must be dreaming— it can't be the real Elmer Dring who's talking to me. Time* does work lots of changes in people's looks, their surroundings, their circumstances, but the Elmer Dring of old could never have said the things you are saying."

For the old unctuousness had imposed on Pansy, too.

"Don't be a little fool," he answered; "you've got to do as I tell you; else back you go to Dassborough."

"No, no!" she answered, "I won't—they shan't take me. Miss Nepean won't let them! "

"She can't stop them," he said, "the police and the magistrate won't care for her."

"But the police and magistrates are only men— mostly kind men, and they'd never be so cruel as to make me leave a dear, sweet friend like her to go back to him."

To him? He looked at her in mute surprise. Was it possible she had not heard? Was this world, that is so small, still so wide?

After all, this was just one of its quaint comers where one might never hear of things happening at one's elbow with which the rest of the world might be ringing. And, as if in confirmation, she asked: "Did Gideon Abbs send you in quest of me?"

"Gideon Abbs is in—well, never mind where— he's dead!"

"Dead? Her face blanched. Unlovely in his life as she had found him, her heart was tender and she was young, and youth always whispers Death's name. "When, and how did he die?"

"He was stabbed to death—an hour or so before you left the Lone House. As if you didn't know! " and he leered at her as the Devil might leer when complimenting one of his own on clever workmanship.

"Stabbed? The night I left the house? Murdered? "

"Yes, with just such a weapon as that he charged you with stealing—a weapon that was missing just before they missed you. I've held my tongue so far on that point, but I've only got to say the word —remember that, Pansy. And now, can't you get me a blank cheque signed by the old woman; can't you pass out some of those jewels she keeps locked up and never looks at?

"We could even get dummies made like 'em, and the change might never be dreamed of. I'm desperate, Pansy. You've got to be desperate, too."

And indeed she was. Hers was the desperation of despair.

"You wicked, wicked man!" she cried, her ordinarily gentle eyes blazing like sapphires. "You are worse than the murderer of Gideon Abbs. It was only his body that was killed—you would slay my soul! Stand back—let me go! "

For he had seized her wrist; a satyr gleam in his eyes, a satyr grin wreathing his thick lips—her words had thrilled him with an exultant thought. Yes, she was in his thrall, soul and body—to defile and to destroy, just as he would.

A moment she struggled and writhed; then, raising the other hand, slashed him across the face with the dog-whip she carried, and swiftly placing the handle to her lips, blew the whistle.

"You Jezebel! I'll pay you out in full! You shall swing for this! " he hissed—then slunk away, for through the hedge-row came the sound of stentorian snuffing and snorting, and a whine deepening into a bay, in answer to that signal of her peril.

And as the brindled bulldog gambolled down the bank into the lane Elmer turned out of it.

Mr. Harvey Darrell had unmistakably stirred things up at Dassborough. To begin with, the Lone House was far less lonesome. Its gardens had ceased suggesting to the beholder wildernesses barren of all save weeds, and had begun to justify their name.

The old windows, opaque with grime and long past cleaning, had been bodily removed, and in their places bright clean ones beamed, smiled from ear to ear, or rather, curtain to curtain—ruthless war had been made upon the weeds that choked even the stone doorsteps. The only weeds the new owner could tolerate, he declared, with a smile, were his incomparable cigars.

The old stabling and coach-house, past redemption, had been cleared away. A garage and new stable were built upon their site, and the place began to look as spick and span as its owner.

But, though Darrell got rid of the weeds, the cobwebs, and the grime, one unprepossessing feature of the old place remained—namely, Jane Collins, and Dassborough wondered why wouldn't, or couldn't its owner get rid of her. Whatever the reason, the fact remained—that she remained, still moving to and fro with stealthy step, her fishy eyes slily, suspiciously scanning all and sundry from beneath the lowering, colourless brows.

That she should voluntarily stay was as much a mystery as that Darrell voluntarily retained her; for other servants had been engaged—a bouncing buxom cook, a prim, precise, neat parlourmaid, a smart young chauffeur and groom, and a gardener, none of whom acknowledged any fealty to Jane Collins, and all of whom reciprocated her distrust and dislike.

Probably, though it suited her purpose to remain there, Jane was as much surprised as anyone at being allowed to do so.

"He wants to pump me—that's one reason," she soliloquised in self-communion, "but that's not the only reason."

If not the only, it certainly was one reason, for her new master daily plied her with questions, using his own discretion as to what reliance he placed upon her answers; questions mainly relating to her late master, but more particularly to her late master's ward, in whom he evinced peculiar interest— infinitely more interest than in the lady neighbours who manifested so lively a concern in him, and so openly expressed compassion for his solitude.

The portrait of Pansy in the daintiest procurable of frames was placed upon the smart, new overmantel, and Harvey Darrell, pacing the now bright, luxuriously-furnished morning-room, would halt and apostrophise it.

"You dainty dear! I know you're just as good and sweet as you are beautiful. Jane, did you know her mother?"

"Yes," she half-spat, half-hissed, out the word. "Oho! I see, Pansy inherited your hatred. And her father? You knew him?"

"Scarcely, scarcely; same as I knew her. Master knew them both before he came to live here, years gone by."

"He brought Pansy here five years ago—from goodness knows where."

"So I've heard, master."

"You've heard? You know—you came here with her. Let's see—from where?"

"I came from my last place, as I've told you." "Oh, yes, from the North—mistress and master dead, also all their friends and relations. I see, you destroy clues as you go; it's a good idea. Jane Collins, if you would tell me why Pansy went and where she went, I'd make it worth your while."

"I've told you a dozen times, I don't know. She hated me too much to tell me.".

"Feared you, I suppose; a girl with eyes like that doesn't know what hate is—not but what I'll swear she had cause to. Do you know, I've sometimes wondered whether she ever left this place. That was one reason why I cleared the fishpond and had the cellar flooring turned up."

"But found nothing. He'd never let me—I mean —what did you think you'd find there?"

"Possibly her remains, if—as you aptly intimated —Gideon Abbs had let you wreak your hate, Jane Collins/' "But I tell you she went right enough! " cried the woman, goaded to wrath because this man, like all the rest, was crazy where that girl was in question, though he had only seen her picture. Esslin was right; all men were mad on some point. "She went to save her neck after what she'd done, and if they'd only have let me speak out at the inquest, the country would have been scourged high and low, and she'd have been brought back to the gallows."

"You'd have liked that, Jane. I can imagine your genial smile watching that girl crouching in the dock, while the cute counsel for the prosecution, link by link, forged and interlinked and riveted a chain of circumstantial evidence by which they'd drag her within the shadow of the cross-beam where the noose dangles."

He little guessed what realisation of imagination the future held in its lap.

"You can go, Jane Collins. Good-night."

"Good-night, master," she said, softly. And when outside the door she hissed beneath her breath: "Good-night, you devil! I think I hate you worse than her—you know so much! "

She paused, crept back, crouched, peered through the keyhole. Click! The door flew open.

"Have you lost something, Jane?"

"No, sir; but I thought I'd dropped a hairpin. Good-night, master!"

Once again the door was closed with the escutcheon covering the keyhole. And Harvey Darrell, seated in his easy-chair and lighting another cigar, mused thoughtfully: "Jane, you'll have to go—when I've quite pumped you dry. People like you aren't safe about— especially having regard to the modern facilities for obtaining poison.'' Then from a cellaret that he religiously kept locked he drew a tantalus and syphon and mixed himself a drink, after which, re-settling himself in the easy-chair, he withdrew from his pocket and carefully perused the document endorsed "Last Will and Testament of Gideon Abbs."

Although Harvey Darrell scarce ever went to bed before the small hours, he as seldom remained there long after them, and on this particular morning he was up with the lark before any of his household, had himself saddled his cob and been for a rousing gallop before the postman had arrived with the morning's letters.

Indeed, as frequently happened, he met the postman at the corner of the road the Lone House fronted and obligingly saved the man a bit of his journey by taking them.

And, scanning the morning's mail intently, he noted one addressed to Jane Collins in a hand he recognised. And a little later in his bathroom he steamed open and perused that letter, which read as follows: nature of the "plant" she would not help to work— notwithstanding Elmer's threats.

Harvey was certain he had threatened her, and bit by bit he wrung from him the nature of those threats.

What was his game? Elmer was puzzled to guess. For the present, at all events, Darrell seemed to contemplate no hostile steps in respect of the mortgage moneys he had misappropriated.

Elmer was convinced that he was a thought-reader, for his next words answered the unspoken question racking Elmer's brain.

"Look here—I hold you in the hollow of my hand. A word from me means for you—Portland. I don't propose to speak that word so long as you aid me in a little scheme I have in hand. I might even see my way to wipe that awkward matter off the slate. It all depends on how you work with me and for me.

"But make one move against me—and Elmer Dring, solicitor, churchwarden, sidesman, pillar and pattern of respectability, takes a still longer holiday—one that may last seven years; and he may spend most of it inhaling the Channel breezes in the vicinity of Portland Bill, in the company of the scum of the earth, clad, like himself, in an unbecoming uniform plentifully sprinkled with broad arrows!"

Job Wattles's prophecy had come to pass. At last that "smart young chap" had come to court Miss Pansy.

There was no mistaking his mission, whatever else might be vague about him—as, for instance, his occupation, his origin, his source of income.

By some this Mr. Darrell was supposed to be an actor chap out of employment, others inclined to the opinion that he was one of them there writing chaps in quest of quiet. Anyway, he was unanimously voted a very affable gentleman, and the village loafers held him in high estimation as "good for a quart" at any time.

But for all his affability the new visitor to the village kept himself to himself, and was perfectly capable of resenting any attempt to intrude upon his reserve, as was made speedily apparent when one good-for-nothing loafer, the bully and the terror of the village, animated partly by impertinent curiosity and partly by chronic thirst, endeavoured to draw him out, and resented the difficulty he experienced in doing so.

"There's a bet of half a gallon on about you, maister," he said, with a jocular familiarity, accosting Mr. Darrell, while tossing coppers to the children he had been regarding Dumpling's sudden inclination to steeplechasing.

For Harvey Darrell plied his suit boldly, openly, vehemently. It was far from difficult to fall in love with Pansy. So far, his plan worked very smoothly; the very picture of her attracted him—had awakened strange thoughts and fancies in him.

When he met her face to face, looked in those violet eyes, listened to the music of her velvet voice, all his being thrilled with a yearning to clasp the girl's form close to his heart, to run kisses on those heavenly lips. He burned with just such a passion for her as that Bedouin whose love-song he had sung to her in the summer twilight.

Strangely enough Pansy herself seemed to see nothing, dream nothing of the fiery love encompassing her; the laughing comments of the wise women of the village seemed only to puzzle her! Nannie Nepean, gently questioning her, ceased in quiet amazement, wondering to herself, "Can it be that love has not yet awakened in her heart for him? that she even does not guess this young man loves her madly?"

Harvey Darrell, too, began to ask himself those questions, and with the quick decision of his nature resolved that she should answer them ; that her answer should be negative he could not, would not dream.

And so one summer night when they had left off playing and singing, and he had taken leave of his hostess, he said, quietly, but with much meaning in his voice: "Pansy," for almost from the first he had called her by that name, "walk with me to the wicket; I want to speak to you!"

Nannie Nepean, old maid as she was, guessed what he wanted to say, and gently throwing a silk wrap round Pansy's shoulders, kissed her forehead.

They went out into the moonlight that touched the dewy lawn to diamonds, out into the sweet, summer night air that, kissing the fair, oval face, toyed with the ringlets on her forehead; her eyes glistened, and she sighed with rapture born of the beauty of the summer, night, the fragrance of the roses gleaming from their bushes through the moonlit dusk. From the woods afar came on the night's sweet breath the nightingale's melodious notes.

"Pansy," said Harvey Darrell, "I am going to tell you something, something that I'm almost sure you know—that you must have known ever since I first looked in your eyes."

As he spoke he halted. She drew back a step, 'watching the moonlight glittering in his deep-set eyes—noting the heave of his breast.

"What is it?" she whispered, almost afraid. "I love you," he answered, "madly—passionately. I loved you as I have never loved a girl ; before—shall never love again. Tell me that you love me, too—that you will be mine for ever and a day. Come—come let me kiss you and clasp you in, my arms."

But she drew back swiftly, and stood there trembling.

"Oh—no, no!" she answered, with a deep, quick indrawn breath, "I never knew—never dreamed anything of this; but now I know and understand— what I couldn't understand before. Oh, Mr. Darrell—I'm—I'm very sorry—I'm afraid I've been to blame! "

"Sorry?—to blame? Why! tell me what you mean!"

His voice was slow, hoarse, and harsh.

"I mean that I liked you ever so as a friend, but nothing else—not as you mean."

"But you don't know—you can't tell—all that will come in time—shall come—must come!" he replied, impetuously, almost fiercely, at the first sign j of the wavering of a house of cards he had raised so high, so carefully.

But she repeated: "No, no! it can't be. I couldn't love you. I couldn't come to care for you like that. Believe me I'm very sorry—but it's best to speak right out, for your own sake."

She might have said more, but her voice faltered, and a strange, vague, chill alarm spread over her as there, in the cold moonlight, she watched his face —and the change in it. For now it was not like the the same man's face; his lips were set hard in a sinister snarl, his brows met in a menacing frown, his eyes glittered with a cold and cruel light, his nostrils were dilated, and his breast heaved with the gasps that told of a hell of fury seething, bubbling in the cauldron of his heart.

It was as though her words had changed the nature of the man—the man himself; and his voice, too, was no longer the voice of love, but the voice of menace—fierce, unrelenting.

"Take care! take care!" he grated. "You don't know what you are saying—you don't know what you're doing. Come here!"

Roughly, rudely, he clapped an iron hand upon her wrist, and held it in his grip.

And she, trembling in heart and in every limb, quailed before the vehement rancour of his regard, even as a timorous dove in the thrall of the rattlesnake's doom-glittering eyes.

"Listen ! " he said. "Until just now I loved you— now I love and hate you. I wanted you to love me —that was part of the plan, though not an essential part. But the life and soul, the beginning and the end, the root and branch of my plan was to make you mine—and that remains. You are going to be mine—do you hear that, girl? Mine at all hazards— all risks—all costs! "

"No, no!" she said, struggling to free herself from his grip. "It can't be—it will never be! "

"But I swear it shall be. Do you know who I am?"

"I only know, Mr. Darrell, that you are quite different from what I thought you. Until just now I thought you gentle, kind, and brave—but now I find you are brutal, cowardly, and more a ruffian than a gentleman. Let me go—you are paining me—how dare you, sir?"

your cheeks are like ice. Or has anything alarmed you? Dearie, tell me."

The girl, hiding her head on the shoulder of the dearest friend that she remembered, remained for some time silent; then she answered in a weary voice: "Mr. Darrell has asked me to marry him, dear."

"Well? Hasn't my little girl been guessing that was coming?"

"Oh, no, .no, no!" she answered, "I never dreamed of it."

"What? Surely—surely my old eyes are not keener than your beautiful young ones, Pansy? Why, everyone's been seeing it—even Job Wattles. And is my darling going to leave me?"

"Oh, no, no! " she answered, clinging to her and nestling to her like a frightened bird beneath its mother's wing. "I never want to leave you—never —never—never! "

"Why, then, my dear, you sha'n't. Heaven knows I don't want to lose you—I've already been crying at the thought of it. We've been so happy, haven't we?"

"It's all happiness here—always," said Pansy. "Peace and calm and—safety."

"Safety? Why, child, you're overstrung; you're trembling like a leaf. Tell me how did Mr. Darrel] take his refusal? I daresay it was a shock to the poor fellow, but I've no doubt he was as gentle as he was sorrowful. Pansy, was it wise to throw away that young man's love—perhaps the very first love of his heart? Have you thought how sad and lonely you may have left his life—that, whatever he may achieve, there may always be amongst the roses one rankling thorn, one empty chair in the home of his heart; and have you thought, too, dear, of your own future?

"Are you certain that you don't love him, and that in the after-time you may not sigh for the very boon which he just now has laid at your feet? I hope, dear, you were tender with him, I am sure you would be."

Perhaps, while she spoke, her mind was straying back along the vista of the bygone years when someone else laid the treasure of a lad's first love at the feet of another maid, just as1 sweet and fair as Pansy—then a very young maid, now an old maid; thought, perhaps, of a soldier's grave marked with a tiny cross?

Then, after a pause, she said, stroking the silky tresses: "Tell me, Pansy."

And Pansy answered: "He was angry."

"Angry? Hoity! toity! The presumption of the man! I could scarcely have believed it of him. i But to tell the truth I don't think young men's i; manners grow nicer as the years roll on."

Angry, indeed! That was Nannie Nepean's last thought before she sank to sleep that night—her waking thought next morning; and when Pansy came . into breakfast, paler still, and with that strange look of terror that the dear old lady could not comprehend in her eyes, Miss Nepean determined to give that young man a piece of her mind if he indulged in any hectoring nonsense with her dear one.

And when that evening Job Wattles announced Mr. Darrell was waiting at the wicket, and would Miss Pansy speak to him for a moment, Nannie Nepean was herself for interviewing him, but that Pansy, with strange insistence, would not hear of it, and flitted out herself across the lawn to where her menacing suitor waited.

"I have come for my answer" he said, brusquely. "Yes or no?"

"I gave you my answer last night," she said. "Can't you let it rest at that? Can't we be as we were, as I would like again to be—friends? "

"Friends!" he answered, with a harsh, mocking, grating laugh. "You never had a foe so deadly as you'll find me, if you try to thwart my plan. Once more your answer—yes or no!"

"No!" she answered, and turned and fled.

"Then God help you! " he whispered, bringing his clenched fist down upon the gate.

What ailed the dog that he bayed so desperately in the middle of the night—tugging frantically at his chain? Was it at the moon or at the shadow it cast—the shadow of Elmer Dring digging with something in the flower-bed inside the gate and burying and covering with his hands the thing with which he had dug the hole?

Well indeed the world had gone with Austen Lisle. Possibly all the better because he never worried how it went—when things were bad thanking his stars they were no worse.

Of course there was grit in the man; but, somehow, while many of his compeers, even better endowed with brains, toiled and moiled and feverishly plucked at Fortune's skirts, she, just like her sex, turned from them coldly to beam on this breezy youngster who chaffed her; and while the more serious friends of his youth were poring day by day over precedents in the Temple library, or, briefless and disconsolate, haunting the Law Courts corridors, were eating their hearts out, plump, chirpy solicitors were tripping up Mr. Lisle's staircase with briefs as plump and chirpy, marked with fat fees; genial K.C.'s got quite used to meeting him in consultation, and learned judges to his appearance in their courts.

People had already marked him for a rising man ; the weedy youth who officiated as his clerk had no longer leisure to gloat over lurid literature, and had ; begun to give himself airs and take an interest in the fluctuations of the Income Tax.

Late one night Austen, having dined in the Hall, sat somewhat late in chambers reading briefs which had reached him for the ensuing assizes, for on the morrow he was to be away again on circuit. One of these strangely interested him.

And long after he had perused and put aside the rest he sat turning over slowly again and again the sheets of this brief for the Crown on the prosecution of one Pansy Armadale, who had been committed for trial at the Dunchester Assizes for the murder of one Gideon Abbs, late of Dassborough.

For that eminent "silk," his leader, had informed Austen Lisle that afternoon that very possibly he would be occupied in a more important civil action, involving, not a mere life, but a huge sum of money, and that Lisle might have to undertake the whole burden of the case for the Treasury.

"It looks bad against her," he muttered, puffing a big cloud from his briar root. "I can't make out how they came to let her get away—why the hue and cry wasn't raised immediately. I shouldn't wonder if the Court has something to say to this Mr. Dring for not mentioning at the inquest the little incident of the missing dagger.

"According to his depositions, he went away shortly afterwards for his health, and I suppose, she being a mere girl, and, as he says in his depositions, a girl he had regarded with a semi-paternal interest, he tried not to think of and not to remember damaging facts; for quite a girl she is even still, poor little wretch!—fatherless and motherless, too. Gad! I hope Rowntree won't leave this case to me. I shan't like hanging this child, and on this brief it looks as though she'll hang.

"Stay! This doctor's deposition seems rather peculiar. 'Deponent had for some time, after close observation, entertained doubts as to prisoner's mental condition; had detected, in particular, symtoms of a predisposition of kleptomania.' 'Um! 'At times had noticed fitful outbursts of passion —which might or might not have been the outward and visible signs of inward homicidal tendency.' "Rather far-fetched that, only—wait a minute. This chappie, too, entertained a most friendly regard for the prisoner; I think I see. Isn't it possible that these two old gentlemen, having known this girl— possibly a pre-possessing girl—for some years past, should be straining every nerve to let her down lightly. Well, if the worst comes to the worst, on my reading of this brief, I shall be inclined to let it go at that.

"But how on earth came that jury to return an open verdict in the face of that girl's disappearance? Of course the missing weapon wasn't mentioned, or, rather, all mention of it w7as suppressed. I should not be surprised to find that this girl's very pretty; that tells with juries. There's evidently something attractive about her from the way that old lady, her present employer—oh, no! I see, she won't have that description—her 'friend' she calls herself—from the way she sticks to her. Eighteen! Tut! tut! What a child!

"Still, Austen Lisle, you've got to remember you're a lawyer, not a sentimentalist; the law, sir, the law, remember the logic of the law, the rigours of the law—and whether that girl's pretty or plain, whether she's sweet or sour, you're going to—to play light, with soft gloves, no 'knock-out' this time, sir. I wonder where that wretched dagger went to; that was the tool that did the work; whosoever's the hand—and the hand that plied it secreted it—I wonder where?"

He re-tied the brief, paced his chambers to and fro, still thinking of that girl, so young, in plight so parlous, just about the age of that other girl. Ah! that was a pleasanter subject to think of altogether. Oh! the sweet memory, bringing back the golden glint of the early sunshine, the crisp, hay-scented morning air.

Would he ever forget those violet eyes with their long, sweeping lashes, and the rare, red lips of her he called his dream-girl?

"Austen Lisle—Austen Lisle! You're a colossal fraud; you a brainy lawyer blest with abundance of the saving grace of common sense, a lucid and relentless logician? Tut, tut! Jehu Junior of 'Vanity Fair' didn't know the man he was writing about. You are nothing but a downright, sentimental simpleton; you ought to abandon the Bar and all its works, and let your hair grow long, and write erotic drivel for the magazines! "

He seized a hat and coat, banged his oak behind him, swiftly descended the staircase, and made his way out to Fleet Street—where he hailed a taxicab, to seek in the club smoking-room refuge from that fatal predisposition to romance.

It was, so to speak, the height of the season at Dunchester. That is to say, the Summer Assizes were on, as also the Flower Show and the Festival; the two latter being shrewdly annually arranged to synchronise with the first.

And the grey old cathedral city, relic of mediæval England, was brightened up with floral waggonloads, carriages and cars bearing bevies of beauty, visitors in holiday attire, the High Sheriff in his magnificence, his trumpeters furnishing the crowning note of bravery, and the judges in scarlet and ermine come to determine grave issues and adjust the scales of liberty and durance—life and death.

But on this momentous summer day all the interest of all the city was withdrawn awhile from the festival of song that formed one facet of the city's fame, from the Yeomanry inspection and ball, even from the Flower Show, and centred in the old Shire Hall, wherein the County Assizes were being held—and a vaster crowd surged round the doors of the public entrance than had last night been gathered at those of the Theatre Royal, albeit a London constellation were shining there.

For at the Shire Hall they were giving a matinee performance of a human tragedy. Not particularly original—as old as the hills, as love and hate, as the branding of Cain, the exacting of an eye for an eye, and blood for blood. And the great ladies of the country-side had clamoured and schemed for reserved seats on the bench far more vehemently than for stalls and boxes at the opposition show, where they were anathematising the bad luck of their morning's performance clashing with the sensational murder trial.

Amid the excitement of the crowd the High Sheriff's car dashed up, a fanfare of the trumpets, the cheers of the crowd, and the making way for his Majesty's judges and their train. And within the packed Court, later, when the ushers shouted, "Silence! Silence ! " that throng rose, and the man in the scarlet gown with an ermine cope, a grey wig, and a yellow face, took his seat, and they called for the players to begin that human tragedy which they named "The King against Pansy Armadale."

Harvey Darrell, smartly groomed, imperturbable, was there in the Court well, unconcernedly flicking the dust from his immaculate patent leather shoes— and no little interest was shown in the smart young heir of the murdered miser.

Elmer Dring was there, looking all the older and none the better, folks said, for his mysterious illness and mysterious absence.; Judex Esslin was there with his white face, his black eyes, and his black hair beginning to streak with grey. They looked hard at him, too, for it was whispered that his evidence might save the prisoner's neck.

Jane Collins was there—her greenish eyes and pale, moist lips working and writhing even more restlessly than ever.

Austen Lisle was there; particular interest was manifested in him, because Mr. Rowntree, K.C., was not there, and possibly it was this young man who would fix the rope on the young woman's neck, folks said.

And Nannie Nepean was there, her eyes bright with much crying; Job Wattles beside her, each adjuring the other to bear up and not give way— and each gazing with anguished eyes at a square pew in the centre of that crowded Court, as yet empty.

There was a strained hush of agonising suspense. Then came the sound of heavy footsteps, the slithering of lighter ones, and two burly men in uniform entered up a stairway into that space which seemed so like a pew and was the felon's dock.

And between them, followed by a hard-faced wardress, a mere slip of a girl, looking so slight, so small, and oh! so pale. A half-sigh, half-murmur of pity, rose like the rustling of a breeze from all around that sea of faces, and Nannie Nepean only half-checked a short, sharp cry, "My darling!"

Upon the girl's neck fell a mass of wavy, light brown hair, and the long-lashed, dark-ringed eyes was identified as the one bought by Gideon Abbs at the sale of Captain Burbidge's effects—as the one he, on the night of the murder, accused the prisoner of stealing.

People began to whisper that, though the girl was pretty to look at, she was evidently an accomplished liar and thief, concealing under that innocent and mild demeanour a world of cruel, callous wickedness.

Austen Lisle put Judex Esslin in the box. And Judex Esslin was "in excelsis," for led on gently from stage to stage, instead of, as usual, being baulked and controverted at every step, he propounded and dilated upon his theory. At least, he would have done so and have demonstrated to his own satisfaction, if not that of the court and jury, the universatility of insanity and that absolutely the so-called abnormal was really in that particular respect the normal; only that Austen Lisle cleverly kept him to one track, letting him gallop along that one at his will—the individual case of Pansy Armadale.

Oh, yes! yes! He had always been sure of the existence of mental aberration in her case; she had told him of the instinctive impulse to fall over when looking from a dizzy height; to do certain things because of their very inherent absurdity, and so on; and out of the most trivial circumstances he constructed his pessimistic theory.

Not that it was looked upon in this instance as the doctrine of despair, because even Pansy's counsel, recognising how securely the chains of circumstantial evidence were being forged in fetters for her, perceived in this hare-brained doctor's theory a loophole in the event of all others being shut.

Nannie Nepean, in the impatience of common sense, exclaimed aloud: "Tut, tut! who ever heard such nonsense; the girl's as sane as I am. It's the man himself who's mad! "

The usher of the court said, sternly: "Silence!"

And Job Wattles mumbled: "Lardy, marm! don't 'ee go 'an spoil her chances!"

"God forbid!" the dear old lady cried. "But I know—and you know—that my darling's innocent; and we know she wouldn't save even her life by that self-branding and malingering lie!"

This closed the case for the Crown. Then Pansy's counsel rose with his speech for the defence.

She had no witnesses to call—could call no witnesses ; all she could say and swear was that she was innocent. And he reminded the'jury that by the law everyone not proved to be guilty must be presumed innocent, and he submitted that guilt, though it might have been surmised, had not yet been strictly proved against her.

True it had been proved that the murdered man had treated her with harshness, that his whole being was absorbed in an avarice that made him suspect humanity at large of rank dishonesty.

Where circumstantial evidence was relied upon it was the practice to seek the motive.

What was the alleged motive in this girl's case? The deceased had been unkind to her, had ill-treated her, had alleged that she had robbed him ? But that man, it had been proved, was unkind to everyone— suspected everyone, charged everyone with robbing him.

Even assuming that, a prey to some uncontrollable impulse, this mere girl did pilfer that dangerous bauble—to be a thief was not necessarily to be a murderer. As to the presence of mammalian blood, it was a weapon constructed to kill or wound; might it not have been put to the use for which it was intended even before Gideon Abbs acquired it?

And then was there not another theory possible? Was it not possible that the real murderer, anxious to avert suspicion from himself or herself, had planted that weapon where it was found to throw the sleuthhounds of justice off their scent? If the defence could not prove that that was so, the prosecution, at all events, had not proved it was not so.

A terrible responsibility was upon them; a human life was in their hands. By giving the prisoner, so youthful, so desolate, so helpless, the benefit of the doubt, they would, at all events, spare themselves one harrowing and haunting reflection—that they had, without absolute irrefutable proof, run the risk, even the remote risk, of wrongly sacrificing a fellow-creature's life—a life called into being by the Heavenly Father of them all.

And the learned counsel resumed his seat, convinced that he had done the best possible with the worst possible material.

Then the counsel for the Crown rose for the reply.

Under ordinary circumstances it is doubtful whether Austen Lisle would have availed himself of this right, but that, in truth, he meant, if possible, to save the child. He commenced by telling the jury that the advocate's career, even in the case of the most eminent ornaments of the profession of which he was so humble a member, had always this alloy—that he had to stand in the position he that day was by duty compelled to occupy; that of piecing together the fragments that made up the picture of an evil deed committed. Heaven knew no man amongst them more sincerely pitied and deplored than he the position of the unhappy girl on trial for her life before them, on trial for that life of which as yet she merely lingered on the threshold.

They had heard the evidence; it was unnecessary for him to dilate upon, or even further recapitulate it. One portion of it, however, he would commend to their most profound consideration—the evidence of Dr. Judex Esslin. And, having regard to the testimony that had been given by others to the general disposition of the prisoner, her amiability, her tenderness to the suffering, even to the lower brute creation, he would not deny that the theory that she was not herself when she struck the fatal blow was quite consonant with the other aspects of the case—and with this he would leave the issue in their hands, praying that a Higher Power would aid them to their duty.

Once again, as he uttered the closing words of his reply, those eyes were raised and met his own.

And, strangely enough, in them, despite his training, despite his reasoning, despite the chain of evidence that he himself had forged and riveted, he seemed to see in them the clear effulgent light of truth and innocence.

Then the judge summed up with much of the usual judicial platitude. If they believed the evidence of the prosecution, they would find the prisoner guilty. If they did not believe it they would find her innocent. And then, being a man as well as a judge, and, to boot, the father of girls of about her age, and, perchance, he, too, reading in her eyes something that Austen Lisle had read in them, the judge laid stress upon the one alternative—even assuming that they found her hand dealt the fatal blow.

And with that intimation he left them to consider their verdict.

The jury quitted the box; the judge, the bench; the prisoner, the dock; and there ensued, perhaps, the worst quarter of an hour of all—the buzz of tongues released, all asking, all answering one question: "What would the verdict be?"

Job Wattles, trembling like a leaf, quavered: "Oh, marm! what will we do without our sweet Miss Pansy? God! that they were only as sure as I am that she is innocent—what shall we do ? What shall we do?"

"He knows. He will sustain both her and us; and life is, after all, only a series of farewells," the dear old lady answered; then, very quietly, and not all alone, she sobbed in her handkerchief.

After a while, of a sudden that murmur of many voices was stilled by another sound. The tramp and shuffling of twelve men's feet, and the jury filed again into the box. The judge re-entered and resumed his seat.

The girl came back into the dock and faced the twelve good men and true.

Harvey Darrell, riveting his gaze upon her from the well, thought how like a vision from heaven she seemed.

The Clerk of Arraigns, rising in his place, in a clear voice demanded: "Gentlemen of the Jury, are you agreed upon your verdict?"

And the foreman said: "We are!"

"What say you, Gentlemen of the Jury, do you find the prisoner guilty or not guilty?"

And every breath was held in one great hush.

"We find," said the foreman of the jury, "the prisoner guilty of the murder of Gideon Abbs; but that she was not at the time responsible for her actions."

A sigh of relief rustled through the court. One An eerie, dreary place it was; of long, superlatively clean corridors, now silent and empty, anon threaded by strange processions of women with wild eyes—then silent and deserted again. Corridors opening with much clanking and clanging of bolts and keys into wards with shiny floors, across which strange creatures flitted, chattering and mumbling.

Outside the building, trim gardens and grass plots, wherein God's plants and flowers flourished and blossomed to cheer His smitten creatures made in His image; beyond—the belting wall with spikes.

Here she lived. No, no! passed her existence. Not that she was doomed to solitude; there were times she wished she had been—but she had companionship in most things. Strange types, all sad, mostly terrible, Pansy, appalled, found surrounding her.

For instance every morning she exercised with, on her right, a young person who had strangled her child (the father of that child, who had left both babe and mother to the desperation of despair, was meantime moving in the most select circles, untrammelled by any rules, unlimited by any spiked walls), and on her left a woman who had smashed her mistress's head in with a hammer.

To occupy her mind, Pansy was given a little garden plot to cultivate in co-operation with an old lady who had dropped her grandchildren down a well. And there was one who used, at irregular intervals, to break the monotony of the regulation without discrimination but with deadly determination, and enlivening the knitting circles of an afternoon by clutching the wardress in attendance by the throat and biting such as sought to stay her. Her they named the Tigress.

And there was one they called the Saint, a woman with soft, gentle eyes, soft and gentle of speech, with an oval face pale and serene, that might have looked down from some old master's canvas, depicting seraphim—a woman with fair hair and small hands, ivory white—and her they watched particularly closely.

And yet another case as pitiful, if not as terrible, as any—was a woman who shrank from every gaze, startled and gasped at every sound, and whose shuffling gait ever and anon suddenly halted—she standing swaying to and fro like a wand at the mercy of the breeze. Victim of some strange nerve disorder to whom the trifles of existence were insoluble problems of vital moment, who wavered in agonising irresolution whether to turn to right or left, to advance or retreat, to step with one foot or the other, collapsing midway on a staircase, daring neither to go up nor down, to whom, holding a precious vase, the very knowledge of its value would compel her to let it fall and shatter.

Alas! there was no lack of company—young and old, cultured, uncultured, brutal, refined; some who had killed because they hated, others because they loved—so complex are the ills that flesh is heir have saved her from what was infinitely worse. And somehow it brought her strange glimmers of hope, when Nannie declared her certainty that Austen Lisle believed her innocent.

Furthermore, the dear old lady's stout declaration of faith inspired the girl to a confidence she had not yet made, fearing lest because of her reticence, perhaps her disingenuousness, on that one point she would not be believed. And so, when she had told this gentle, loyal old lady of certain matters that till then, deeming immaterial, she had not mentioned, Nannie Nepean for once was angry with her, exclaiming: "Child ! child! Why did you not tell me of these things before?"

But there were other visits, not angelic, neither few nor far between.

Elmer Dring, in the interests of Justice, and Judex Essline, in the interests of Science, sought from the Home Office and obtained special facilities to visit the prisoner.

And once Jane Collins came, and in the presence of others, and with many tears, endeavoured to bring the poor girl to a proper state of mind, to prevail upon her by evincing repentance and remorse to bring along and indicate the glimmering of returning reason.

And, when alone with her, to whisper: "You little devil! How I hate you! It does me, oh! such good to see you here, crushed and done for; to see the cheeks fools of men compared to peaches and to roses growing haggard, and your eyes that the idiots used to rave about sinking in and losing their light, and your hair beginning to grow thin and lank. A few more years of this and it will be turning grey; you'll be old before your time ; you'll be ageing like the other wretches here!"

And Jane Collins chuckled that life had its pleasant moments after all.

One day, in the garden of the Palace of Despair, Pansy beheld, flitting from flower to flower like a butterfly from the outer, gladder world, an angel-child, some four summers old, with childhood's sunshine in her hair and eyes, and childhood's music in her laugh. And because Pansy herself inclined to what was lovable, such inclined to her, and as her eyes met the child's and her face reflected the smile of the child, the little one looked up with a happy, trustful laugh, asking: "Please, lady, pick me a flower! "

And Pansy, gathering a blossom, gave it to the child with gentle words.

"What's your name?" the little one asked. "Pansy? Why, that's a flower's name. I suppose that's why you live in the garden? I love pansies —they're so pretty, just like you."

"Great Heaven! Miss Enid, you tiresome girl!"

A nurse, neither of the staff nor in the uniform of the place, rushed at the child, snatching her away with a terrified look at poor, panic-stricken Pansy.

"You know what mamma told you—never to leave your own garden, and never to speak to— these people."

"But I like her. She's so nice and kind, and she----"

That was all the girl who had become a Number heard, as the little one was whirled away by her fluttered and angry custodian. And Pansy's cup of bitterness again overflowed. She watched the little vision of happiness out of sight; saw her disappear within the enclosure of the medical superintendent's house; then, turning, encountered with a shudder the Tigress and the Saint, who, ranging themselves, walked on each side of her and thought aloud and incomprehensibly.

"Mamma,'' said little Enid, "me met a real flower that had grown into a real lady, in the big garden outside ours—such a pretty flower-lady—a Pansy. Do all the flowers grow into real people?'' Swiftly the nurse interposed with an exclamation. She had only turned a moment; Miss Enid was so quick, and, after all, had only, wandered a little way.

But the medical superintendent's wife checked and chid her, bidding her reflect what might have happened had the poor creature's delusion taken a more harmful turn than that she was a pansy transformed into a human being.

Pansy's tender heart smarted more than ever, comprehending all. To think that she, who so loved little children, should be marked out as one to be avoided by a little child!

Tearfully she hurried from the garden, and sought her one solace in that Palace of Despair. In the large kind of common room there was a piano, and it was Pansy's wont to while away many hours in playing over the melodies that her dear Nannie had loved so fondly.

Oft -times while her fingers strayed along the keyboard, gaunt, sad-eyed women would gather noiselessly around, hushing incoherent babblings—and over many faces would steal a happier and a hopeful calm, wild eyes would quench their restless fires in tears, so that those whose province it was to keep watch and ward there fostered Pansy's devotion to the piano, encouraging her to minister to those minds diseased with rhapsody, sonata, nocturne and fantasia, at her own sweet will.

And when, through the open windows that were barred, across the garden beneath, and, beyond, across the other garden the molten gold and silver notes rippled through another window that was not barred, and it was said that it was the girl Pansy Armadale playing so marvellously, little Enid declared that that was her "flower lady," and that she was sure that she was good and kind, and lovable as she was lovely, or else how could she play such music?

What strange spell had come over Austen Lisle?

His boon companions of the Temple and the club were positive that something was the matter, because ordinarily the dear chap was so sparkling and exhilarating, there was such a buzz and seething of cheerfulness about him—and now—what ailed the wine, it was so flat and lifeless, like a last night.

Was it over-work—was it worry? his friends asked each other, and, by-the-by, him direct. He laughed in answer; and they noted that even his mirth had not the spontaneity nor the pleasant ring of old.

The slatternly laundress who did for him, the callow youth who read novels all day in his clerk's room, both of whom adored him, were, too, perturbed about him, and the former confided to the latter her worst fears: "I've seen so many go like it in my time in the Temple—fine young gents as ever paid accounts without demeanin' of themselves by askin' questions. Depend upon it, 'Erbert, he's in love, and one of these days he'll be a-givin' up residence in chambers an' livin' in the suburbs. I've lost a-many in my time, and I—I feels it like a hicy wind, the presentiment of losin' him—with Mrs. Austen Lisle to tot up every penny to the housekeepin' and make out she can do cheaper at the Stores."

And Herbert, who was himself beginning to evince a keen interest in building societies and house-rents, complacently reflecting that even if the governor took unto himself a sharer of his joys and sorrows, the partnership would not extend to the practice, remarked philosophically that, after all, it was only what was to be expected and that there came a time when a man got tired of seeing life and inclined to double harness.

Indeed, all was not well with Austen Lisle; and that which was amiss with him by day and night, stood between him and the judges and juries he addressed, mocked him in whispers in the pauses of the arguments of learned friends, hovered at his elbow striding through the busy street, even at the play intruded on him in the midst of all the lights, all the jingle, all the merriment, and, at midnight tracked him up the silent, reverberating staircase, and facing him in his lonely sitting-room, gripped him by the throat.

That awful growing suspicion, developing into a dread, that he had been the victim of instructions drawn from faulty premises.

No, no! hot the victim—that was the haunting, taunting, exasperation of it, the blame of it, the shame of it I For, if those conclusions or those premises, or any or all were faulty, false, or fraudulent, then he was the instrument of a terrible miscarriage of justice, and the victim was the girl in whose violet eyes he had read the light of truth and the protestations against the false.

And so, night after night, when over the Temple courts and cloisters hung Night's starry veil of silence, not broken but intensified by the fountain's muted plashing, Austen Lisle sat far into the small hours by the light of his reading-lamp, turning over again and again the pages of the brief he had begged the Treasury solicitors to loan to him again.

Depositions, shorthand notes, instructions, he reread them all, line for line, word for word, he had them by heart. And there ensued with his brain —well-balanced, well-trained, well-stored though it was, the strangest conflict in his experience. There it all was, piece fitting into piece; the girl's flight after the quarrel, after the accusation, after the threat—why, he himself might have borne witness to her irrational wandering in the small hours through the countryside, her remaining perdu all that while —then, most overwhelming, convincing of all, the discovery of the weapon with which the deed was done, buried in the garden-plot she tended.

There it all was, crushingly convincing, apparently irrefutable; and yet, there in his mind's eye he could see her now, truth and innocence reposing in her eyes. Yet, common sense impatiently replied —how could she be innocent?

Unless—ah! unless there had been devised and wrought against her villainy surpassing the crime of which she was accused. Unless, deliberately, foully, some person—no! some persons—directly or indirectly concerned in the murder, had planned to throw suspicion upon her; unless, indeed, there had been a foul conspiracy to add by perjury murder to murder.

Then he scanned the matter from that point of view; noting the points he would have laboured had he been retained upon the other side. Why hadn't he been on that side? What a fight he would have made !

And at the rising of the Court next day, which was a Saturday, Austen Lisle, flinging his brief-bag to Herbert and his kit-bag into a hansom, dashed away to Paddington, where he took a week-end ticket to Conington, which was the nearest town to Homecroft.

Nannie Nepean, seated alone in the little drawingroom opening on to the flower-beds and the lawn, was thinking how desolately quiet the place seemed without Pansy—which was, indeed, just what she had been thinking ever since that heart-rending time when the burly men in uniform from Conington had taken the dear child away. No merry laugh, no rippling music broke the silence now. As for the piano, it was closed, unattuned, like Nannie's heart.

"I shall have to sell the place up, pension off Job Wattles, and go and be a paying guest somewhere, with a landlady making remarks about my appetite and people putting me down for a fussy old maid. But, then, what's to become of you, Bingo? They won't put up with bulldogs in select boardinghouses; and I couldn't part with you—for she loved you, and you worshipped her, didn't you?" and Bingo assented with a snort and two wags of his kinky tail.

Then of a sudden his eyes flamed, and with a growl which swelled into a bark he dashed across the lawn. And presently Job Wattles, bandier and more bowed than ever, shuffled along, pulling his forelock to announce that a strange gentleman was asking whether madam was at home.

Miss Nepean, with a distrust of strange gentlemen nourished since the days of Harvey Darrell, inquired, suspiciously: "What sort of gentleman, Job?"

"Lardy I pleasant enough, marm. Never seed Bingo take to a stranger the like of it before. And yet, for all I says stranger, there's summat in the face I seem to know, but cannot recollect."

That Bingo had taken to the stranger was counted in his favour, and a few moments later he was ushered into the little drawing-room. And Nannie, too, was wondering where had she seen that pleasant face before.

"My name is Austen Lisle, Miss Nepean," he said, "and the object of my visit is a matter requiring some explanation."

"Austen Lisle! " she exclaimed, clapping her hand upon her heart. "Oh, yes, yes! I remember. It was you who persecuted—I mean prosecuted my darling, and prevailed upon them to declare that white-souled little martyr guilty of what she never could have done," and here her voice broke into a little cry.

And Bingo, the brindled bulldog, snuffled and snarled suspiciously.

Job Wattles paused at the door of the room into which he had just ushered the visitor. With the name and madam's words, Job's somewhat hazy memory cleared in an instant. Why, yes, the face, the voice, were unchanged ; it was only that wig and gown were replaced by a tweed hat and suit, else he would have recognised in a moment the lawyer who had put Miss Pansy away, and whom accordingly Job had catalogued as a villain of the deepest dye; and, tapping the open door, he inquired, significantly, whether madam was likely to want him, if so he'd wait handy.

For not even the difference in their physique and years would have deterred the old gardener had Nannie Nepean then and there decreed the visitor's summary removal.

Such a reception might have chilled many a visitor, but Austen's mind was intent on matters of far graver moment.

"No doubt," he said, "you are surprised at my visit. Indeed, I myself can hardly realise it, for, frankly, I have thrown conventionality, professional etiquette—everything to the winds. And why? Because, I tell you candidly that since the trial of Pansy Armadale my mind has never really been at rest."

Nannie Nepean gazed in his face with dilated eyes—a ray of light was glimmering through her gloom.

"You say that?" she faltered. "You, who prosecuted—oh, don't think I'm bitter against you, sir; you are a barrister-at-law—your duty is to your own clients."

"Subject to what is just and right," said Austen, gravely.

And Nannie Nepean replied, with animation: "Yes!—yes ! that, too, I understand—I can read that in your face; even while you were unfolding your case against her, forging the chain of evidence against her link by link, the most appalling thought of all was that it was all so logical, that there was nothing unfair to protest against—only some fearful mistake or misunderstanding, or something even worse, underlying all. The others told me, when it was all over, that you fought the case with only half your energy—that you scarcely seemed yourself."

"An advocate," said Austen, "is only human; sometimes very human, from experience of many varied phases of humanity. Part of what was in your mind has been in mine.

"Is it possible that this girl, who had in you so staunch a friend, had in others deadly, relentless, unscrupulous enemies?—for to my mind it is on that hypothesis alone that any theory as to her innocence can be constructed. Now, I am here in confidence and with a desire that justice may prevail, and if upon that understanding you care to receive me, you and I upon the merits of this case will think aloud."

She held out both her hands, grasping Austen Lisle's.

"They told me you were a great lawyer," she said. "Now I know that you are that which is greater— you are a true and honest man within whose mind justice occupies a higher pedestal than law."

"The law," he said, "is the body, and justice is the soul; justice is the cause, and the law is the sword that strikes for it—the buckler that defends it. If, perchance, at times the sword is slow to strike, and the shield fails to avert some swift thrust of evil, it is because the shield and sword are mortal, for law is human, made by humanity for humanity—but justice is divine."

Then they went at length once more into the case which twelve good men and true, presided over by a learned judge, had tried—only this time Austen Lisle asked questions which would have been put had he briefed upon the other side.

What were the antecedents of this Harvey Darrell, this second cousin of the murdered man? And whence had he arrived at Dassborough?

Nannie Nepean could give no answer. She only knew that Mr. Darrell, when visiting at Homecroft, had spoken of years of travel in many lands, that he seemed to know most of the cities of the West.

And for the first time Austen learned that Darrell had been for the fortnight preceding Pansy's arrest a frequent visitor at Homecroft.

"What!" he exclaimed—"a suitor? He had made love to the girl and she had rejected him? Oh, why on earth was all this not brought out in evidence? "

And what of Pansy's parents? And how came Gideon Abbs to be her guardian?

Nannie Nepean could only tell what little she had gathered from the bewildered girl since her arrest— how that, until her father died, while she was quite a little girl, she had lived happily with him in a comfortable house with spacious grounds in the North Country, where Gideon Abbs used at long intervals to come to see her father, and they used to talk dry talk over dry dusty deeds. Once they quarrelled, and she remembered her father telling Gideon that he believed he'd been his enemy for years, that he was a wolf in sheep's clothing, and that he meant, now his eyes were opened, to alter his will, for he wouldn't leave a dog to his care, let alone a daughter; and how, a few days later, her father was brought home, covered, on a hurdle, after a burst that ended with the death of—not the fox, but the fox-hunter. How, later on, Gideon Abbs had made his last visit to the house that had been her place of drear captivity and bondage.

For hours Austen Lisle sat with Nannie Nepean, asking question after question and writing down every answer, with Bingo dozing contentedly at his feet. For Bingo, the brindled bulldog, was, like most dogs, a judge of character and knew friends from foes.

It was characteristic of Pansy that everybody— except Jane Collins—loved her. Elmer Dring, Esslin, and Darrell only cherished rancour against her because they had desired her in vain. In the Palace of Despair the poor, distraught creatures hovered about her, seemingly soothed by all things of or appertaining to her—her girlish beauty, her voice, her ways, her gentleness in all things.

"Pansy, tell us a story. Pansy, sing to us, play to us, stay with us." The Terror in the throes of a paroxysm ceased her shrieks, her curses, her battling, and at the sound of Pansy's voice, and the touch of her cool little hands suddenly burst into a flood of weeping that eased her heart, and, freed of the seven devils that had possessed her, knelt at the girl's feet as at a guardian angel's.

The girl who had killed her child talked to Pansy, and to her only, of it—of its pretty ways, of the cling and touch of its tiny fingers at her breast, and the music of its cooing. The Woman Who Hesitated—and was lost, with Pansy near ceased the nervous twitching of her hands, and her eyes awhile were still.

Nor were those entrusted with the care of the distraught creatures unmindful of these things, and they began to exchange opinions that circumstances and conditions must have been especially exceptional tor this dove of a girl to have played the pantheress; that the old curmudgeon must have broken all records in goading and exasperating.

Some of the younger doctors even hazarded the possibility that in this instance Justice had been blind because of dust thrown into her eyes.

Children, of all things that yearned for tenderness, she had always charmed. Little Enid gave her parents no peace until, after many vain petitions and much earnest pleading ignored, they at last were partly persuaded, partly wearied, into allowing her (subject to abundant precautions) to walk and talk with the pretty flower lady. By degrees a confidence was established, the stringency of the conditions was relaxed—Pansy was allowed, or rather besought, to visit the superintendent's garden, and, by-and-by, to supplement little Enid's music-lessons with further tuition; and it was noted that the little one learned more with Pansy during a month than in the preceding year.

When, later, the child lay sick with measles, and light-headed with fever, calling for Pansy to come and tell her a pretty tale, to make daisy-chains, to play to her, Mrs. Glenfern, ignoring all rules and precautions, sent to Pansy and implored her to help nurse Enid. And Pansy, who loved the child devotedly, willingly, eagerly, kept long, loving vigil by her bedside, reading and chatting in her sweet, low voice to her, soothing her to sleep with music eloquent of the ripple of silvery cascades, tire song of birds at dawn and June breezes amid roses—so what wonder that after those days Enid came to love and cling to her Pansy more and more?

From the beginning nurse declared it was courting disaster to give such freedom and indulgence to an inmate, and that Dr. Glenfern ought to have been the last to tolerate it—that, some day, mark her words, he would be sorry for it; and it seemed to be a sore point with nurse that both the sorrow and the occasion for it were so long deferred.

Until at last one day it was in a triumphant voice that she exclaimed: "There, ma'am! I told you so; I knew it, I knew it—who's a croaker now, I should like to know?"

For little Enid was nowhere to be found!

High and low they searched, at last with blanching faces, but for any trace of the little one in vain.

Then, flustered herself and doing her best to fluster those around her, Nurse Emden fluttered to and fro, clamouring stridently—where was the child, and where was the wretched girl who had been trusted with her by those who should have had more sense?

"Here, here!" Pansy answering her name, clamoured along the corridors, appeared looking so bright and cheerful that Ann Emden bit her lips in momentary chagrin.

Then, after a baffled pause, she demanded shrilly, "Where is Miss Enid?"

"Yes, Pansy!" the child's mother repeated though in a gentler tone. "Enid disappeared a little while ago, and we thought perhaps she was taking a ramble round the garden with you, or that you were giving her a music-lesson."

But Pansy answered, No, she had not seen the child. And Mrs. Glenfern paused, puzzled, and the doctor, too. Where could she have gone to?

Ann Emden, approaching menacingly, said, in a rapid undertone: "Look here, it will be worse for you if there's any nonsense. Speak out. When did you last see her?"

"Half an hour back," Pansy answered. "After her music-lesson she walked with me to the gate of the house-garden, where I left her."

There was a stir of consternation. Once again the garden was traversed, and the grounds of the place were ransacked high and low, but with no trace of Enid.

It was then that arose that thrilling cry, terrible at all times, in all places, to hear; then and there trebly terrible—"Fire! Fire!"

The cry was taken up again and again by other voices, attendants and others with grave faces hurried to and fro. Glenfem, not forgetting his child, but remembering his duty, swiftly gave orders for opening the hydrants and manning the engine. A rush was made towards all the fire appliances and the engine-shed.

From the doors of the block went scuttling inmates in the uniform of the place, from some of the windows wreaths of smoke began to curl, here and there a tongue of flame, and there was the clink of splintering and falling glass.

Mrs. Glenfern, beside herself with the double horror, hastened with her husband, heading the rush towards where the fire was taking hold, and in the stress and panic of that stampede attention for the moment was diverted from the bewildered Pansy.

Except that Ann Emden, giving vent to jealousy and spleen, screamed at her: "This is your work, you little hussy; you've shown your claws at last; but I'll be even with you!"

It had been her intent to see that Pansy was secured, but at the moment a throng of panic-stricken inmates, surging along the corridor, swept them asunder, shrieking: "Fire! Fire! Fire!"

Surely enough, along the wards and corridors came rolling huge, billowy clouds of choking smoke, a blast of heat, the sound of crackling, and tongues of lurid flame driving all living things before it, save such as it smote down! And, as if at the touch and bidding of a malignant, appalling terror arose rampant in those regions of despair, as through the tenebrous, swirling mist wild, dishevelled forms, with wilder features, rushed hither and thither shrieking, gesticulating, frantic and frenzied.

Pansy caught the contagion of the terror, but her fear was not for herself, but for the loving child she loved, and swiftly, desperately she threaded wards and corridors, crying frantically: "Enid! Enid! my darling—where are you?"

And suddenly through the blinding yellow haze she heard a voice screaming: "Pansy! Pansy!" and a wild form, winding and whirling in maniacal exultation, swirled through the smoke towards her, seized her.

It was the Saint—transformed into a devil, shrieking in the fiendish hysteria of a Hecate.

"Glorious! glorious! At last the Devil's come into his own! "

"The child—the child!" gasped Pansy. "Have you seen her?"

"Yes—yes!"

"In Heaven's name—is she safe?"

"Safe? Oh, yes. Trust me—I've seen to that! Safe bind, safe find; she's in the store-room there, where they keep the oils, the turpentine, the methylated spirits. I coaxed her there to see the lovely toys and pictures, and I said you'd come and sing to her; it was for me to bind, and for the fire to find!"

"Merciful Heaven! " shrieked Pansy.

Then she flung herself with all her force against the door, screaming the child's name. But it was locked, and the maniac broke into a pealing yell of laughter.

"No one's to enter there after me, except the Fire King—and see! he comes to claim her. This is the sacrifice I've vowed! Look! the flames have caught the wainscot—they're creeping on, their hungry tongues are licking the walls close to the lintel. That was my bargain; to be last to see her, as she was— with the sunny curls and the rosy cheeks—no one else will see her except as she will be! "

"Give me the key—the key! " shrieked Pansy, in a frenzy.

And she flung herself upon the Saint to take, by force, the key that had been turned on Enid's life.

But the Saint was strong with the strength of the seven devils within her; and poor Pansy, panting, half-choked with the heat and fumes, reeled back before her blows.

"I tell you none shall see her as I left her—except the Fire King! Look! where he comes dancing! You hussy! go and play the music for him! "

Then desperation lent Pansy cunning.

"Yes! yes!" she gasped, hastily, "he must have a tune to dance to; only—my music's all in there! Give me the key—quick—quick! Come, come!

don't make the Fire King angry—and, oh! I'll play you such a dance you've never heard before. Come! come! the key!"

She crooned the last words, her hand, closing round the fingers, hooked on the key, and, still crooning, detached them from that grasp. Then, how she knew not, but swiftly, desperately she plunged it into the lock, wrenched it round, and dashed into the room where the terror-palsied child was clinging to the window bars.

"Enid! Enid!" she cried.

She snatched the little one in her arms—then ran with her from that place of doom.

Shrieking a torrent of imprecations, the Saint flew at her; and Pansy, desperately screaming, "Enid, run for your life along there ! " dropped her and grappled with the woman.

"You cheat! you jade—I'll kill you!" yelled the Saint. "You've cheated me; you've robbed the Fire King of his prey—you wicked thief I "

"Yes," said Pansy, "I was wrong—I am sorry— let me undo the wrong I have done and bring her back I"

She slipped from the relaxing grasp, dashed desperately into the density of the smoke-filled corridors, stumbled along until she saw the loom of a tiny figure within the yellow cloud—heard the sound of a faint, gasping cry.

"Enid! Enid!" she cried again.

Again she caught up the little one and staggered, stumbling with her through the smoke which now belched even more furiously.

Her foot struck a fire-bucket. In this she drenched the child's pinafore—then her own handkerchief, which she wound over her mouth and nostrils.

So she blundered on, fearing that each step would be her last; that the smoke would smite her down for the fire to wreak its wrath on her. She clutched an iron railing, and, summoning all her waning strength, dragged herself to a stairhead, then staggered down—down into lesser density, till at last she could breathe a prayer of thanks. Then, half-blinded, she staggered along the lower corridor, down another staircase to where men and women were assembled, plashing to and fro in water oozing and pouring from serpentine hose.

One woman, catching sight of her, sprang out of the throng with wide opened arms, crying: "Pansy! Pansy! you have found her! You have saved her! " Then she placed Enid in her mother's clasp, and, reeling, would have fallen, but that they held her.

Hurriedly, as well as might be, they took a muster-roll, and in spite of all that had been and still was being done, found gaps here and there. The staff was working heroically—the brigade as the brigade always works; even among the inmates Pansy was not the only one to render welcome aid.

Strange changes had been wrought in some by the excitement and the shock, notably in one. The Woman who Hesitated, hesitating now no longer, but clothed and in her right mind, was working with the staff, calm and collected as any of their number.

The Terror was crouching in a corner, trembling like an aspen, whimpering like a tiny, whipped child.

But where was the Saint?

It was only Pansy, recovering from her semiswoon who could tell them where, could show them where; and, forgetting all, save that she was a fellow-creature, afflicted and in peril, Pansy made her way back, in spite of the protestations and evading the efforts to persuade her; back to the corridors above, back through the smoke gloom, in quest of the woman who, in her blindness, had threatened her with death.

But where smoke had loomed fire now roared and blazed, and the bewildered, baffled girl was forced hither and thither along tortuous ways—those by which she had come being here and there cut off.

And so it came to pass that, retreating before the belching cloud, and swiftly, but not a second too soon, wrenching open a door ahead of her, she found herself in an isolated corner of the grounds.

Close to a gate—an open gate! left by workmen of the staff hurrying to the scene of the fire. Close by ran the hedge of the gardens allotted to the staff, and on its broad, well-trimmed back, linen was bleaching—also a sun hat and a print skirt and blouse. No one was about.

And none saw Pansy as she passed through the gate ajar, attired in these.

She was dead, and death had come to her with tenfold terror; to the last ghastly chapter of her life the ghastlier finis had been inscribed in flame. Ashes to ashes? With her it was ashes to cinders.

Jane smiled at the flash of her own humour and felt quite gay and young, reading again and again the lurid narrative of the lurid catastrophe; and the wine of life coursing through her veins brought a colour to her pallid cheeks, the colour of a parboiled shrimp.

Yes! it was there—there; seeing was believing. She would like to have seen it blazoned in letters of brass let into stone—but there it was in print. Not that that was proof infallible, in these days, but the news was too good for Jane and too bad to others not to be true.

And Jane Collins, who wallowed in the morbid and gloated over the ghastly as a rule, re-read till she had by heart the account of the awful conflagration in the Palace of Despair, when the Fire King had crowned the other horrors abiding there. She would have read it with interest under ordinary circumstances, but there, among the list of those reported perished in the holocaust, appeared one name investing it all with a transcendent glamour for Jane Collins—the name of Pansy Armadale.

Harvey Darrell, noting the strange alacrity in Jane's demeanour as she entered the breakfast-room, wondered what had happened—what disaster had overtaken anybody.

"Quite a nice morning, Jane," he said.

And Jane replied, instead of "Is it?" according to her wont: "A most delightful morning, sir—and there's the newspaper."

"Confound the newspaper! " said Harvey Darrell. "With chops and kidneys and new-laid eggs and hot new milk and fragrant coffee on the breakfast-tray, why encumber it with what can't be swallowed? My chops, my new-laid eggs, my fragrant coffee, my—well, if not pretty, passably attentive Jane—and let them force their pills, their beans, and their encyclopaedias down other people's throats." But Jane was minded that he should learn the morning's news, and, moreover, that she should witness its effect upon him.

"There's plenty in this morning's paper, sir, besides advertisements," she suggested.

Surprised at her communicativeness, he answered, with an enquiring look, then said: "No doubt; the opinions of nobodies who know no more than I on subjects I don't care two straws about; buckets of gush over the humbugs on their own side, of gall for those upon the other; the comments of one fraud scribbling at a desk on the utterances of another fraud to Parliament or on a platform. There's the opinion of the gentleman whose bad play had been rejected on the possibly worse one that the rejector had produced, together with the prophecies of certain two-legged asses relating to sundry horses over whom much ill-afforded money will be lost by greater asses who have never seen them."

"But there's the news, sir."

"Exactly, Jane. There are the murders, the horrible accidents, my genial Jane, the breaches of our glorious laws—some of the breaches."

He shrugged his shoulders as he sliced his chop.

"There's been a big fire, sir."

"And, doubtless, another bankruptcy averted; and yet it's a long while between quarter days. Isn't there a close time for big fires, Jane?"

"It ain't a shop, it ain't a warehouse," she said, with eager, trembling fingers, holding back the newspaper which she clapped on the table before him. "It's there, sir—there, look!"

And with one bony finger she pointed to the scare-head: APPALLING FIRE AT A LUNATIC ASYLUM!

Frowning at her persistence, he glanced at the column. Then his eyes dilated, he dropped his knife and fork, took up the paper, seized with a strange emotion, whose existence in his being he himself had scarce suspected.

And he knew that deep down in his nature there was hidden a chord of tenderness that never had been struck until he gazed on Pansy's picture; then only faintly, but which vibrated thrilling all his being when he had met her face to face, had held her hand and listened with rapture to her voice.

The savagery dominant in him had silenced that heart-string when she had said him no, but now that he read the news that she had ceased to be, that that sweet image was no more, that that tender flower of girlhood had been cut down in her bloom—it was the savagery in him that was stilled, and the one tender chord that wakened in his heart.

Just for a moment; then he bethought himself how much easier the game was now, how much more secure the stakes, and, after all, his procrastination in destroying a certain document did not matter now.

Only when Jane Collins unable to keep down the fierce joy bubbling in what served her for a heart, chuckled sibilantly, "She's got her deserts at last!" Harvey Darrell turned upon her such a thunderous face, with such vivid lightning flashing from his eyes, and such a grim sneer in the hard lines of his face that she turned hastily to shuffle from the room.

"No," he said, "people don't get their deserts in this world; they get other people's. It's the blatant fool who gets the clever chap's deserts; the straight smart man very often gets the luck that ought to be the waster's; the woman who hasn't a soul to lose has frequently a pair-horse carriage to ride in, and the girl as good as gold is mud-splashed by its wheels. Such a fate as hers was probably designed for such as you, but Fate in flinging her awards somehow contrives to mix them up."

He lit a cigarette, rose from the table, and sauntered off in dressing-gown and slippers to complete his toilet.

"He was clean gone on her! " mused Jane Collins, packing her tray. "He liked her almost as much as he dislikes me. What a time I should have had of it if she'd fancied him, too! But it's given him a jar, the news; I meant it to ! "

What was that glittering upon the tray amongst the cutlery?

A silver matchbox; and Jane Collins forthwith scrutinised it, as was her way with everything of Harvey Darrell's. There was nothing noticeable about it except that it was engraved with the monogram "A. V.," and in a corner "M. C. M."

Just as she looked about her for materials for. an imprint, a bell rang. Her pulses quickened at the sound of a voice—Elmer Dring's.

There was no need for her, when passing with her tray, to ask if he had heard the news—his lifted eyebrows answered that. A little later he was closeted with Harvey Darrell.

"You've heard of—this calamitous affair?" he asked.

"Jane Collins reported it to me with gusto," the other answered.

"Of course we couldn't foresee that that was going to happen," said Dring, mopping his moist forehead with a silk handkerchief; and Harvey Darrell sententiously replied: "Of course not. You merely meant to hang her, not to burn her."

"No, no! " expostulated Dring. "It was arranged all along to corroborate Esslin's theory; and as for you—why not 'we'? You engineered it all."

"My good man," said Harvey Darrell, drily, "is that all you've come here to say?"

"No, no! " said the other, "and, of course, what's done can't be undone; only as things have turned out worse than was intended, it's only right that the terms should be revised."

"My dear good man, what are you driving at?" asked Darrell, and the other said: "You know—you can't bluff me this time. You know the price that was agreed when the plan was agreed, and you know there's five hundred due to me; and now it's turned out as it has, I mean that five hundred to be a thousand, or else--"

"Or else what? " asked the other. "You've hinted once or twice what would be the consequence of my submitting to—shall we say blackmail? No; nasty word—we'll call it your demands. I think the idea was that you were to seek Miss Armadale direct and impress upon her that she was a deeply wronged young lady—that the jury who convicted her were under quite a wrong impression. Well, my friend, by all means carry out that grand idea."

"You know I can't, you know it's too late; that's why you're riding the high horse. I see your game —only remember you can't play this game on your own. You're one to three. There's Jane Collins to deal with."

"Yes," said Harvey, thoughtfully, "there remains Jane for you to deal with," and he laughed at the uneasy twitch of the lawyer's features.

"Don't forget Esslin," he said, significantly.

"Not by any manner of means. Forget friend Esslin! Who could—and talking of the devil-----"

He turned from the window through which he was glancing as he spoke, and striding across to the door, shouted: "Show Doctor Esslin up at once. Showing up is the order of the hour,eh, Mr. Dring?"

The lawyer answered with a malignant glance; there was neither cordiality nor honour amongst those thieves. Just then Esslin entered, sallower of hue, blacker of visage than ever, streaks of grey in the raven-black hair, a fiercer light in his still more sunken eyes.

"You have heard the news?" he said, in an awed undertone.

"Yes," said Elmer Dring. "It's as well you are here. He's going to jib—thinks he can throw us over safely now."

"How's that?" asked Esslin, with a significant glance at their host.

"My dear Esslin," said Harvey Darrell, "I am charmed even more than usual to see you—take a cigar. At the very moment of your arrival we were discussing you. How strange! Just as you rang I was maintaining that Judex Esslin's theory was unassailable; that all men and women on some point were mad, and citing an instance."

"Magna est veritas; et prӕvalebit," chuckled the doctor, with a shrug of his shoulders. "Whose was the case in point?"

"Elmer Dring's own case," Harvey Darrell exclaimed, stridently, and he smote the table with his clenched fist. "For just imagine what the man contends."

He darted a defiant glance at the man of whom he spoke, then to the other went on, slowly, distinctly, out worse than was intended, it's only right that the terms should be revised."

"My dear good man, what are you driving at?" asked Darrell, and the other said: "You know—you can't bluff me this time. You know the price that was agreed when the plan was agreed, and you know there's five hundred due to me; and now it's turned out as it has, I mean that five hundred to be a thousand, or else--"

"Or else what? " asked the other. "You've hinted once or twice what would be the consequence of my submitting to—shall we say blackmail? No; nasty word—we'll call it your demands. I think the idea was that you were to seek Miss Armadale direct and impress upon her that she was a deeply wronged young lady—that the jury who convicted her were under quite a wrong impression. Well, my friend, by all means carry out that grand idea."

"You know I can't, you know it's too late; that's why you're riding the high horse. I see your game —only remember you can't play this game on your own. You're one to three. There's Jane Collins to deal with."

"Yes," said Harvey, thoughtfully, "there remains Jane for you to deal with," and he laughed at the uneasy twitch of the lawyer's features.

"Don't forget Esslin," he said, significantly.

"Not by any manner 'of means. Forget friend Esslin! Who could—and talking of the devil-----"

He turned from the window through which he was glancing as he spoke, and striding across to the door, shouted: "Show Doctor Esslin up at once. Showing up is the order of the hour, eh, Mr. Dring?"

The lawyer answered with a malignant glance; there was neither cordiality nor honour amongst those thieves. Just then Esslin entered, sallower of hue, blacker of visage than ever, streaks of grey in the raven-black hair, a fiercer light in his still more sunken eyes.

"You have heard the news?" he said, in an awed undertone.

"Yes," said Elmer Dring. "It's as well you are here. He's going to jib—thinks he can throw us over safely now."

"How's that?" asked Esslin, with a significant glance at their host.

"My dear Esslin," said Harvey Darrell, "I am charmed even more than usual to see you—take a cigar. At the very moment of your arrival we were discussing you. How strange! Just as you rang I was maintaining that Judex Esslin's theory was unassailable; that all men and women on some point were mad, and citing an instance."

"Magna est veritas; et prcevalebit," chuckled the doctor, with a shrug of his shoulders. "Whose was the case in point?"

"Elmer Dring's own case," Harvey Darrell exclaimed, stridently, and he smote the table with his clenched fist. "For just imagine what the man contends."

He darted a defiant glance at the man of whom he spoke, then to the other went on, slowly, distinctly, measuring the weight and noting the effect of every word, and with the significance of his glance conveying much more than his words.

"He says that you and I and he, three men of position, conspired to accuse falsely and to swear away the life of the unhappy, ill-fated Pansy Armadale. What can be done to cure our poor friend of this wild hallucination?"

"To the devil with your bluff I" Elmer Bring flared up. "What did I tell you, Esslin? Look here, we're in this swim together—we needn't measure phrases or mince matters."

With a wink Harvey Darrell drew the other just for an instant aside and whispered to the doctor: "You've weighed our last night's chat?"

"Yes, and agree."

Their eyes met. Esslin with his most professional air, hands on hips, scanned Elmer Dring from head to foot.

"Excuse me," he said, and seizing his wrist with one hand, with the other he took out his gold repeater.

"To the devil with your foolery! " shouted Elmer. "What game's this you're playing?"

"Now, don't excite yourself. I want you to keep quite quiet. I'll send you a draught round directly, only I want to take your temperature," and from its morocco case he produced a clinical thermometer, requesting Dring to place it underneath his tongue.

Then Elmer's rage broke bounds.

"I see your game! " he shouted. "This job's been planned between you; you think that being two to one you'll throw me over. But I'm not done with yet."

They listened to his stertorous breathing as he descended the stairs; then Darrell mixed two whiskies and sodas, and they sat down to discuss terms and ways and means, particularly as to jettisoning Jonah.

Meantime Jonah, in the person of Elmer Dring, was pacing the narrow lane skirting the Lone House grounds.

"Wants to break the contract—wants to throw you over, eh? Just like a man. Just like you wanted to serve me, Elmer! Oh, yes! I know you; if you could have coaxed the old man into forcing that girl to marry you—ah! anyway, she won't come between us any more."

"Of course not, Jane," he said, with the unctuousness of old. "Nobody will ever come between us. Haven't I sworn it?"

"You've sworn lots of things, Elmer," replied Miss Collins, and Elmer uneasily adjured her not to be inconsequential and to stick to the point.

"That's just what I am doing—what I mean to do, and what I want you to do," she went on, hurriedly, fitfully. "When are you going to keep your word, your oath? It's easy enough—just walking into a registry office. I'd—somehow, I'd rather not go through it with you in a church; I should be afraid of being struck by lightning. What do you want to keep putting me off for?"

"Don't I tell you that I'm only waiting till I've settled with this fellow—till I've got quits with him? Curse him! Oh, Jane, if we could only bowl him out, as I'm certain he's to be bowled out—if we could only get a clue! Help me to be revenged on him, and I'll marry you the next day before all the world with the Archbishop of Canterbury's special licence."

Even the pale blood in her pulses leaped as he spoke.

"You mean that, Elmer—true and honest? Ah! whatever we are to others we're going hand in glove together, right to the end, Elmer—right to the end. And, listen, I've found out something—not much— only you never know."

And then she described the monogram upon the matchbox.

"They're not his initials, Elmer. A. V. don't stand for Harvey Darrell. And what's M. C. M. for?"

And Elmer Dring explained that that was one way of setting forth one thousand nine hundred, and when after more protestations and yet more vows he had parted from Jane Collins, he went his way wondering who was A. V., and what was Harvey Darrell in the year one thousand nine hundred—and where.

A pleasanter dinner-table one could hardly imagine; the fare was good, the wine was good, the company was good, the wit as dry as the wine, and when the ladies had risen and the blue, fragrant mists began to wreathe from rare Havannas, and the decanters, glowing like mammoth rubies of wondrous fire, circled, and the comfortable, cheerful circle drew closer round the dessert-laden mahogany, cracking jokes with walnuts and bandying anecdotes, taken, like the nuts, with just a grain of salt, on each of the clean-cut, clever faces, there sat an expression which might have been interpreted, "Ye gods! I have dined to-day!"

That the company gathered round his hospitable mahogany in Bryanston Square was shoppy, and much of the conversation was shoppy. Wickham Manners the solicitor, would have owned cheerfully to be true. He would, however, have denied that that was detrimental, for the man loved the profession he had been bred and reared in, held that its lore was the most learned, its wisdom the most profound, its wit the prettiest in the world.

He would defy you to cite a jeu d'esprit more sparkling than Chitty's remark to the leader whose speech the falling plaster interrupted: "Go on!

'Fiat justitia, ruat cœlum,'" or a happier retort than that of the bland junior who, when a certain just but overbearing judge snapped out, "I can teach you law, but I can't teach you manners," replied, "I don't think you can, my lord."

They were a goodly type of manhood. The learned judge, who had just set them chuckling with a little story about Lord Chief Justice Cockbum and the High Sheriff, had in his day stroked an Oxford Eight to victory. The learned K.C., chuckling at the yarn, was equally at home in the pigskin as among the parchments. The rising junior with the brawny build and sun-tanned features only a few years back had made his century at Lord's for Cambridge. Austen Lisle, albeit a trifle fine drawn, the result, they had just been telling him, of overwork, had at the latter university attained the high distinction of a double Blue.

"It's always the way," said Wickham Manners, "in the law as in other professions, a man has either not enough or else too much to do; but you're certainly over-doing it, Lisle—you're working at a gallop."

"Never mind," said the eminent K.C., M.P., "work's better than worry. When a young man is up to his eyes in it he hasn't time to make mistakes and brood over them. For instance, he might be falling in love with some girl he couldn't marry."

Austen Lisle answered with a laugh that told little what was in his mind. Only just then he had been reflecting how the one remorse of his life had come in the natural course of his daily work. He was thankful when the conversation drifted into another channel.

On to, strangely enough, the subject of self-made men—men who had risen from the bottom rung by their own merits, some all the better, kindlier, for the memory of the days of early struggle; others who, because they had climbed from the bottom rung, seemed never to dare or care to look back upon that rung, or recognise any common interest with those ranged on it.

Somebody cited Sugden, who began life by sweeping out the paternal barber's shop and became Lord High Chancellor of England—never ashamed of his former lowly station nor shaming the lofty one he reached. Then someone called to mind the instance of another barber who in far earlier times reached eminence—Oliver le Dain, who, while clipping the hair of Louis Onze, whispered information in his ear, and became in time that king's most trusted minister—not keeper of his conscience, since he apparently had none to be kept.

One man hazarded the view that in these days such a climb would be even more difficult, but Wickham Manners would not have it so, contending that Figaro's occupation offered exceptional advantages for the man of brains and ambitions minus means.

"For instance," he said, "I had once in my office a young fellow who, though when he came to me he knew nothing of legal routine, struck me by the scope and variety of his general knowledge. He knew a smattering of most languages, and seemed familiar not only with the principal seaports and cities of the world, but, and that is what struck me most, the routes and means of reaching them. Curiosity led me to question him, and I found that he had started life as a hairdresser's apprentice, and having a desire for travel, had found no difficulty in securing not only a passage, but good wages, on board any of the liners. He had thus visited New York, Boston, 'Frisco, Yokohama, Tokio, Pekin, Calcutta, Cape Town, Alexandria, Melbourne—in fact, as I say, the principal cities of the world, and, still following his trade, had obtained employment in the principal hotels wherever he found himself."

"Smart chap," said the judge.

Wickham Manners made a wry face.

"Bit too smart."

"He disappeared—simultaneously with a trifle of £3,000 in notes out of the office safe."

"Being a barber—he thought it time to cut," chuckled the K.C.

"I should like to meet him again," said Wickham Manners, thoughtfully and grimly. "But it was a pity he wasn't straight; he was a most intelligent fellow. He was engaged at the time with one of my managing men in investigating the matter of one Abbs—Gideon Abbs, you know, the man who was murdered at Dassborough. An occasional client of mine had an idea that his wife was the next-of-kin, and instructed my firm to investigate matters. It turned out, however, that there was a nearer claimant in the person of one Mr. Harvey Darrell." "I remember the man," nodded the learned judge. "You know, I tried that girl—Pansy Armadale, wasn't that the name?—for the murder! Ah, you prosecuted, I remember, Lisle. I never thought there was much in the contention of that man Esslin that she was 'non compos mentis'; I don't think the jury did either, for the matter of that. At the same time I'm very glad they let the child off; it would have upset me frightfully to have passed the capital sentence on her."

"I recollect the case," rejoined Wickham Manners. "Lisle, have another glass of port—you're not looking very fit; and, gentlemen, what do you say, shall we join the ladies? Oh! here's a special 'Standard.' Nothing happened, I suppose, of any importance?"

And casually, carelessly, he took the paper from the salver with which his butler had entered, opened it, gave a roving glance across the sheet, then exclaimed, "Good God!"

"What's the matter?" and his guests clustered round.

"Look!" he said. "Appalling fire at the very place they sent that girl of whom we were talking! List of missing! Oh! how terrible! See! there's the poor child's name—Pansy Armadale!"

A murmur of pity filled the room. Above it there was the sound of a groan, then a thud—and Austen Lisle went down in a heap upon the floor.

Having used the precious trio to further his ends, Harvey Darrell cast about him how most easily to rid himself of Esslin, Bring, and Jane Collins—the jettisoning of his three Jonahs—fully appreciating that the Jonahs would object to the jettisoning.

His first step was to set them by the ears, a task far more difficult, having regard to their mutual distrust.

Nothing was easier than to convince Judex that Elmer was his unrelenting enemy. He had read it in his eyes, he said, together with the glare of inordinate avarice, culminating in a form of mental aberration akin to that which had dominated Abbs —the only difference being that Abbs had a weakness for an appearance of legality, liked to make believe that he was honest, would assume the virtue of a title if he had it not—whereas Elmer Bring, ostensibly a man of law, was a law unto himself, drew the line only at being found out.

"Beware of him I" he said. "Beware of placing trust in him! "

Harvey Darrell cheerfully promised to beware.

Jane Collins (whom Judex had treated with some distinction as possessing considerable influence over Gideon Abbs) he now regarded, as Harvey Darrell's servant on sufferance, with impatience, and it only required Darrell's covert intimation that Jane had pooh-poohed the doctor's theories and impugned his integrity for Judex excitedly to proclaim her a morbid monomaniac with a latent homicidal tendency hastening to climacteric development. He instanced her fury at the narrow escape of Pansy Armadale from the law's ultimate penalty and her unconcealed exultation at the dread fate reported to have overtaken her.

"Beware of her also," he said; "don't let her mix your drinks."

"They both hate you," he added, vehemently. "I have heard them collectively and individually express the most ardent desire that some crushing disaster might befall you—beware of both! "

Harvey Darrell laughed between puffs at his cigarette; then, exclaiming contemptuously, "Skittles!" flung the fag-end from him as though that typified such measure of importance as he extended to the pair in question.

Nevertheless, he kept a sharp eye on Jane's movements, and at night the Great Dane slept on the mat outside his bedroom. He adopted, too, a fashion of moving stealthily about the house, appearing here and there most unexpectedly, and he had taken to wearing list slippers noiseless as Jane's own.

One morning, entering the library, he thought he noticed Jane Collins moving away from an old-fashioned bureau he religiously kept locked.

"What are you doing at those drawers? " he asked, sharply.

"Dusting," answered Jane, flickering a feather brush.

He eyed her keenly.

"By the by, Jane," he said, "as I explained some time ago, there is no necessity for you to hurry or flurry yourself in looking out for another situation. I know you don't like hurrying or flurrying, even when you're dusting."

"You said I could stay on as long as I liked; that was the understanding when we talked over the evidence I was to give."

"Jane, I am afraid you are the victim of a misunderstanding. True, I said there was no hurry, but many months have flown, and there has not been any hurry. At the same time, it was not arranged that you were to be considered as a fixture appurtenant to the freehold."

"Oh, but I understood differently. You said I was to stay indefinitely; that was the word."

"Precisely; that word being absolutely distinct from eternally. There is a saying, Jane, that variety is charming. You, I am sure, wedded to convention as you are—though otherwise a spinster until such time as friend Dring shall screw his courage to the point and implore his pretty Jane to name the day—even you, I say, must at times yearn for new surroundings, even at the cost of leaving the employment of one to whom you are naturally so ardently devoted."

"If you mean I'm only stopping on here to suit myself, that's all right. If it hadn't suited me I shouldn't have stopped a minute; but it was settled I could stay just as long as I liked, when we settled what I was to say before the magistrates and at the Assizes."

"Settled, Jane? You are dreaming."

"No fear; you know what was settled between you and me and Elmer Dring."

"Tut! tut! Jane Collins. I shall begin to believe that there's something in Doctor—I mean in a theory of a scientific friend of mine—that in matters of memory your mental balance is not quite accurate, that at intervals you are subject to a certain not uncommon lapsus of memory, the outcome of some strange cerebral paralysis."

"I know what you mean!" snapped out Jane. "That's Judex Esslin's gibberish you're talking, and I know what your game is; you want to get rid of me, now that you think you're safe and settled here. Very well, then, only think it over—think whether it's going to pay you in the long run. I don't think it will."

"You mean I am to weigh the importance of a discharged servant's testimony? Tut! tut! Jane Collins. Go downstairs, and while you remain in my service conduct yourself respectfully, or you and your boxes will be simultaneously bundled into the street." Her pallor became more ghastly her eyes gleamed like a cat's, green and yellow, their sparse, sandy lashes quivering distinctly.

If looks could kill, if eyes could wither, it would have fared ill with Harvey Darrell, as she, after a silent pause, breathing heavily, sidled from the room.

Then with a gasp, culminating in a shriek, she tripped, staggered, almost fell over the huge pied Great Dane crouching beyond the door, and who started up with a fierce, ominous growl. And, deadly as was Jane's hatred for her new master, for once she welcomed his appearance, when hastening to the door he seized the brass-studded collar circling the big brute's massive neck, exclaiming: "Hallo, there! Steady! Steady! Lucifer, impetuous rascal! I gave no word! Jane, I think you'd better clear!"

Jane Collins thought so, too, and scuttled, livid with terror, from where he stood straining with both hands at the huge collar of the ferocious beast.

That night, in the shadow of the trees along the narrow lane skirting the Lone House, Jane Collins walked alongside Elmer Dring.

"Your old master was not what people would call a particular man, Jane Collins," he was saying, "but this young one is the most unscrupulous person I ever knew. Anything else to report, Jane?"

"Yes, if you won't interrupt. He's taking on amazing over what's happened to her. Nearly every time I happen on him he's striding to and fro like a tiger in a cage, muttering about the white face gleaming through the flames. Judex might have something to say about it also."

"Anything else, Jane?"

"Yes, if you won't chatter."

"Oh, don't be angry, Jane—I'm in such a state. Do you know that man, that curse, he's serving me as badly as he's serving you, flinging down the ladder that's helped him in his climbing. You know what I've done for him, what I've risked for him, penal serv—well, anyway, unpleasant consequences."

"Oh, go on, say it! penal servitude for perjury, both of us, for a price."

"Yes, my price was to be five hundred pounds. I meant to make that five hundred a thousand—I told him so—and now what do you think his answer is? He says that if I'm going to spring, he'll spring, too—the other way; he'll meet bluff with bluff. He said he'd be content to have given me five hundred, but now that I've claimed a thousand I can go to the devil—do my best or my worst; he'll give me nothing. There's a villain! And there's a woman-dunning me through her lawyers for a matter of a thousand pounds of hers I—was taking care of."

"I know—I know," said Jane Collins, significantly—she, in her time, having entrusted various sums to Elmer's care.

"And now she's threatening to sue me—to prosecute me. I've had a letter from her lawyers, a big firm in London—Wickham Manners and Co.; they threaten---- Hist! what was that?"

"A rat, I suppose, or, perhaps, a weasel amongst the bushes. Walk further from the bank."

"They threaten, Jane, to swear an information and have me arrested on a warrant, and I relied upon that thousand pounds and a bit more. What shall I do—what shall I do?"

"I suppose," said Jane, thoughtfully, "it wouldn't be any good going straight to them and telling them how this villain's disappointed you? Do you think that would lead to anything?"

"Yes, Jane—it would probably lead me to Portland a little sooner than I seem like going. Can't you think of something sensible, woman?"

He spoke with fierce vehemence, and clutching her lean arm until she winced beneath the grip.

"Don't you see," he said, "that I can't keep my word to you till I get through this whirlpool that is threatening to sink me down in its vortex?"

"I don't see what whirlpools and vortexes and such things have to do with that," snapped Jane. "I don't see why you can't do to-morrow what you promised to do months ago—years ago; walk into a registry office with me and fix up our union. Ah! if you'd only done that—even now I've got a card up my sleeve."

"What do you mean? What card?" and he clutched the lean arm again as excitedly as though she had been referring to concealed cards literally.

"I mean what I say," she went on, vaguely. "I mean, if you'd been straight with me I might have saved you even now."

"But I always meant being straight with you— you know that, Jane," he said, reverting to the unctuous manner that he had found so potent with this woman whose one flatterer throughout her life he had been. "You know I've been the victim of circumstances—haven't I? There was old Gideon, always wanting me to square up accounts. And then there was this fellow going to smash me over Flinders's mortgage—and now there's this trouble." "And not any one of 'em need have hindered our walking quietly into the registry for the matter of ten minutes-----"

"But you know what was always my idea, my dream, my chiefest ambition, Jane, dear—I wanted you to have a wedding, a real wedding with orange blossoms and a big cake and bridesmaids, a pair of greys dashing up to the church door, the organ playing the 'Rogues'—I mean the 'Wedding March,' and all the women envying you, Jane, and all the men envying me."

"Yes, yes," she said, in a hasty whisper, her anaemic pulses wakening into a flutter, "I've heard of it so often—but when's it going to happen? "

"As soon as I get round this comer, Jane—as soon as I get into the straight with my field settled," said Mr. Dring, betraying an intimacy with Turf metaphor scarcely to have been expected of so austere a pillar of respectability. ''Jane, tell me— what's the card you are hiding up your sleeve?"

'I've come across a will—Gideon's will," she whispered.

He started as though a heavy hand had struck him a blow in the dark there—though, as a matter of fact, there was only a clenched fist shaken at him in the dark—ten yards away.

"His will! Who prepared it?"

''It's in his own hand, and it's short and sweet; at least—no—no—not sweet, short and bitter—at least, it was for me to read. I found a rusty old key —one of Gideon's—that fitted the bureau that vagabond keeps his papers in. I opened one drawer after another—I daren't rummage, he's so artful; if I'd stirred a single paper he'd have known it. And all at once I came on a document folded in four inscribed, 'Last Will and Testament of Gideon Abbs.' I opened it, and just as I'd glanced through it I heard that brute of a dog at the door moving, and guessed the brute of a man was coming—and I'd barely time to replace the will and relock the drawer when he, quiet as a ghost, slipped into the room."

"But the will—the will? How did the old man leave his property—the realty—the personalty?"

''Everything to one person—and who do you think that was?"

''To me, Jane?" exclaimed Elmer, eagerly. ''I always felt he thought a lot of me, and that his snarling was his way of showing it; and, after all, I never robbed him of much—I mean it was the people in his grip I squeezed most. You don't mean to say that his residuary legatee and his heir are his esteemed and valued friend and lawyer Elmer Dring?"

"I don't mean to say anything of the sort," answered Jane. "There wasn't a word about you." "The old rat! What he got served him right," And after a pause he went on: "Then who was it, Jane? You don't mean to say it was you?—and yet who more likely—who mere deserving than Jane, my dearest Jane, my per-etty Jane?"

"No—it wasn't your Jane." And as she spoke she felt the tender pressure of his arm relax. "The ungrateful old brute never even left me a legacy." "Then it was that mad, mad doctor. He'd talked him into it. Remember, he's always said in your presence and in mine that the old man was 'non compos mentis,' so we can queer his pitch unless he squares us—we can say enough to set the will aside for undue influence if it was Esslin."

"But it wasn't; you've guessed wrong again. It was Pansy—Pansy Armadale, the daughter of the only woman he'd ever cared for, he said—the child he said he'd persecuted for her father's sake, and he went on to say he left her, for her mother's sake and to make amends for all that persecution, all his estate, both real and personal, whatsoever or wheresoever, whether in possession, reversion, contingency, or expectancy, absolutely. Not altogether that he hated her less, but that he hated the crawling liars around him more, and because of the disappointment it would be to Judex Esslin, Elmer Bring, and Jane Collins. Wasn't he a bad old man? Don't it seem like a judgment that she wasn't to live to have it?

"Ah! I know what you're thinking," she went on, when she and Elmer had walked some paces in unbroken silence. "You're thinking what a pity it was she wouldn't look at you—wouldn't listen to you—that Gideon wouldn't fall in with your scheme and make her marry you. You know you were always sweet on her, for all the difference in your ages; that's why I always hated her worst of all. Don't tell me I'm dreaming—I know it—Gideon told me. He used to chuckle when he told me, and say there was no fool like an old fool."

"Did he? The old vagabond! I—I paid—I mean—ah! he met with his deserts. But let's talk of something else, Jane—this may alter the complexion of affairs altogether."

"But the girl's dead."

"Yes, but she may have left relatives; this wants thinking out. I wonder who acted for her father? Meantime, if I could only stave off Wickham Manners—if only for a month or so. I know what I'll do—I'll go down to town. I'll see him! "

Austen Lisle's collapse was attributed, not unnaturally, to the strain of overwork which his success at the Bar had entailed, though, doubtless, it was agreed, the shock of learning the fate of the poor girl whom he had prosecuted had proved the last straw which had broken down the overworked system.

For many weeks after his sudden collapse at Wickham Manners's house in Bryanston Square he remained in a critical condition, and eminent physicians whispered gravely their fears as to brain-fever, greatly to the dismay of Herbert, who had of late been conjuring up visions of himself in later life hovering around the bench in the capacity of a judicial body clerk—as also of the tender-hearted but untidy person who tidied his chambers.

"For he's a gentleman every' inch of him," the lady, in the privacy of the "Essex Head," declared to a bevy of others in her own line over a quartern and four outs. "He'd never so much as add up an account; and, as for examining the items, there was no 'Where's this and where's that?' And 'What's become of so and so?' And 'All the thingammy gone already !' He knew what was due to his laundress, and paid it up prompt and pleasant—and now, pore dear! there he is with his temperature that 'igh and his pulse that low—and here's my best respects!"

Naturally, his collapse having happened at their house, the Wickham Mannerses were especially concerned as to his progress, and when at length his constitution asserted itself, and, after a spell of sea-air during a short cruise, he had returned to town and practice, practically convalescent, their hospitable doors were among the first he visited.

He dined with them en famille, and good Mrs. Wickham Manners, as tender-hearted as she was comely, and who had times out of number declared to Jack that it seemed such a pity with such a lot of dear, nice girls as they knew single, that a charming, clever man such as Austen Lisle should have no one to care for him and look after him, was especially gracious and sympathetic.

"We were all quite shocked," she said, "when the news came upstairs; we'd been waiting and wondering for ever so long before Jack sent up and asked me to speak to him, and so many of the ladies had enjoyed your conversation at the dinner-table—in fact, were talking about you most of the time. I mustn't tell you the nice things they said about you."

"Yes, by Jove! it gave us all an awful shock," said Wickham Manners. "I can tell you the judge was dreadfully upset. Old Aynsley Dell couldn't have been more grieved if you'd been his son. Well, needless to say, we were all shocked and pained."

"You are always everything that is kind," said Lisle. "As a matter of fact, I feel I owe everybody an apology for making everything so uncomfortable."

"Tut! tut! Ours was the sorrow for your sake— everybody is very glad that you have so thoroughly recovered."

"Of course the circumstances were peculiarly distressing," said Mrs. Wickham Manners. "As I understand, you were reading the account of that terrible calamity, in which the poor soul whom you'd prosecuted perished."

"Yes, yes! " said Wickham Manners, bending his brows, and with a quick, appealing glance at his wife, "I am sure Austen would rather not discuss the matter. Forgive me, my dear, shall we talk about something else? Come, the Academy, the opera—oh! I know now—here's a subject you arc great on—servants!"

"I am sure I'm not one of those bores of women who are always chattering about their sen-ants. Certainly my maids, as a rule, arc excellent—they stay with me quite a time."

"Yes," laughed Wickham Manners, "Cissie has them straight up from the country, transforms them from raw, rosy country lasses into pattern housewives—then, just as they are drilled to perfection, off they go with the grocer's man, butcher's man, the milkman's man, or some other tradesman's man, all smiles and beams, with Cissie's advice in their ears and her wedding presents in their boxes."

"And the dear souls all turn out well," said comely Mrs. Wickham Manners. "Oh! and do you know I've recently engaged a most interesting girl—not as a maid-servant nor yet quite as a governess. Originally she came as a sort of help, to assist in the nursery with needlework, and as she was evidently quite a lady, I got her to take the younger children with their lessons. She seemed quite delighted, and they're so fond of her; and then we made a most glorious discovery—we found that Miss Sylvester, that's her name, was absolutely a genius with music *—plays exquisitely, with the most beautiful touch." The butler, entering, delivered a message in an undertone to Wickham Manners, who replied: "You told him I was at dinner?"

"Yes, sir—but he said the business was most urgent. "

"Why didn't he come to my office before I left? I object to seeing people here on business—besides, it's most unprofessional." Then to his wife and Austen: "It's a man named Dring—Elmer Dring. I've had to make certain demands of him—as a matter of fact, unpleasant ones. He's come up to ask if I'll see him—I think I must decline."

"Elmer Dring!" exclaimed Austen Lisle, passing his hand across his brow. "Stay! don't send him away—never mind me. In fact, after your interview with him, I'd like a chat with him myself. He was a witness against the poor girl you were speaking of—Pansy Armadale! "

"I'll tell you what I" said Wickham Manners, "if you don't mind, I'll ask you to be present at the interview; having regard to the nature of the business, it would be just as well to have a witness to it."

Meanwhile Elmer Bring, waiting in the library, drummed with his feet in impatient agitation.

"It's like his insolence to keep me kicking my heels here like a lackey!" he muttered. "I'd tell him so—if I dared, if he hadn't got the whip-hand. Ah!"

He started up, as the door opened, in a tremor of agitation; for he was come on ticklish business.

But a scowl of malignant dismay convulsed his features when he observed the man he had come to temporise with, to wheedle into clemency, practically into condonation of laches—candid people would have said of fraud—w7as accompanied by one of the most astute as well as rigidly conscientious men—one of the most trenchant cross-examiners at the Bar of England.

"I—I must apologise for this intrusion," Elmer faltered; "but my business is urgent, and," with a glance at the other, "confidential."

"Indeed?" Wickham Manners answered, drily.

"And yet I can well understand that nothing but the most urgent business would necessitate my being approached on a professional matter in my private house."

"I know—I know—and I have to ask your indulgence—but it is a matter of life and death to me, as you will understand, else l would not presume to ask an interview with you upon that matter—alone."

And again his glance travelled significantly from Wickham Manners to his companion.

"Oh, as to that," the master of the house—and of the situation, said, airily, putting his cigarette, "this is Mr. Austen Lisle. Austen, this is Mr. Elmer Bring—but I take it introduction would be superfluous, eh?"

"I have met Mr. Bring," said Austen, quietly.

And the other, with even abnormal unctuousness, replied: "All the world knows Mr. Austen Lisle—the hope, or the despair, if I may say so, of the evil-doer, accordingly as he is for or against him." And he added, pleadingy: "But our business, Mr. Wickham Manners, is strictly private."

"I beg your pardon!" the other replied. "Seeing how matters stand at present, I would much prefer this interview to take place in the presence of a third party."

"Oh, really! " squired Elmer. "That is unreasonable—impossible. "

"Then," said the other man, decisively, "the interview is altogether impossible."

Elmer paused, baffled. He knew that he who faced him was a man of his word, as firm of purpose as clear of brain, and his sycophantic smile gave way to the sullen darkling of the found out cheat at bay.

"What does he know about it?" he growled.

"Nothing—as yet. I am going to state the position—unless you object and this interview is to terminate immediately."

"Go on, then! " said the other. "Only, remember, we're all birds of a feather."

"What do you mean?" said Wickham Manners, sternly. "That we are members of the same profession—at present, I admit. Mr. Lisle belongs io one branch of it; I, and for the present, you—to another."

There was a world of significance in that "for the present" that made Elmer Dring's flesh creep.

Meantime the other went on to state the case.

"Some eighteen months ago this gentleman—we attorneys are all gentlemen, you know, Lisle— by Act of Parliament—somewhat mysteriously absented himself from the town of Dassborough, where he practised, and certain of his clients found some difficulty in tracing also the whereabouts of their trust funds, in some cases their title-deeds. After an absence of almost a year, he again turned up almost as mysteriously as he had disappeared, and sundry pressing claims were, at all events temporarily, satisfied. Not, however, all. . . .

"A certain confiding widow woman for whom Mr.

Dring had acted, but for whom I am now concerned, alarmed for the safety of a sum of a thousand pounds, Mr. Dring had persuaded her to commit to Ills hands for investment, pressed for the immediate return of her money, and at last declined to be content with Mr. Dring's assurances as to its safety. Unwilling, however, to proceed to extremities in the case of one whom she had for years regarded as the personification of honour and integrity, she temporised to the extent of accepting, in lieu of so many pounds sterling, Mr. Dring's promissory note at three months for the amount, and a letter acknowledging that he had misapplied the moneys entrusted to his case. . . .

"Three months elapsed; "Three months—six months elapsed; that note, long since matured, remains unpaid, dishonoured, and Mr. Dring has been unable to wheedle it out of his quondam client for the simple reason that she, consulting me, as a friend of many years' standing, placed it, together with instructions to safeguard her interests, in my hands. As a matter of fact, at the present moment it reposes in that identical safe. . . .

"You see, Lisle, I have waived professional formality in receiving not only the debtor, but the security, within my domestic threshold."

Elmer Dring was staring in the direction indicated at the unpretentious- private safe, holding that which was of such moment. That was as near and yet so far!

And he ransacked his memory in quest of any clue to any exceptionally gifted burglar whom he might have shielded from his full deserts.

"That," said Wickham Manners, "is the position of affairs. Now comes Mr. Elmer Dring, solicitor of the Supreme Court, with particulars, perhaps, as to his own position, or, anyway, of his proposals."

"My position is this," said Elmer Dring: "My funds are still locked up." The two last words halted in his throat; he didn't like the sound of them. "Money's very, very tight just now, and, hang it all! " he went on, suddenly, "we're brother solicitors—I'm in a hole—things have gone wrong with me in a sequence ever since----" He drew a gasp—thinking of the time since when. "You must give me time I "

"I think it very possible," said Wickham Manners, "that any one of His Majesty's judges, before whom the matter might be brought, would feel constrained to give you—time! "

"Ah! but you'd never go so far as that; we're brother solicitors."

"You'll pardon me from observing," said Wickham Manners, "that it is you who appear to have overlooked that circumstance."

"I know—I know!" the other mumbled. "And I know how down they are upon—people in my position, nowaday. It's so easy for the judges to be independent of them, to be down on them, now the time is far away when they looked to them to make them. But—come! come! you're not going to extremities! There's no money to he got out of a criminal prosecution.

"Perhaps not," said Manners. "But it's a beautiful screw; so many people who will face with confidence your special or your common jury in any division of the High Court you please and play the glorious and time-honoured game of bluff to perfection, have a morbid horror of facing a judge and jury trying the issues in the less rarefied atmosphere of the Old Bailey."

Dring winced, then exclaimed, spasmodically: "I swear I meant to make things straight, and I could have done it. I held the trump card in my hands, if only—ah! if only she hadn't perished in the flames!

"Site—who? "

"Ah! you don't know—you don't understand. But he does. You remember, Mr. Austen Lisle, when last we met, and when you held the brief for the prosecution in Rex versus Pansy Armadale."

Wickham Manners and his guest exchanged glances of mutual wonder whether under the stress of his ordeal the man's brain was weakening.

Then Wickham Manners said: "Please don't imagine, Mr. Dring, that it's a Treasure to me to act antagonistically towards any member of the profession it is my honour and my privilege to follow; it is a pain—but where a man's duly is in question pain or pleasure must be—out of the question. Come, now—we are in the presence of a man whose name is a synonym for professional rectitude. Lisle, between lawyers, between men, what is your view as to what can be done consistently with mercy with professional brotherhood, and with duty?"

Austen Lisle in silence strode across the room slowly once—twice.

"Your duty," he said, "I need not tell you, is consistently with justice, first and last towards your client—just as it was his duty; and, if one is to suffer, it must be he who forgets, not he who remembers his duty."

The words fell on Elmer Dring with the crushing weight of the stroke of doom.

For he knew his men; he knew those words meant —action.

"Think it over! " he said. "Give me a chance— a last chance; you don't know what I've gone through. Ah! it's easy to talk about the downward path while you're safe upon the tableland at the summit—but when you're going down the slope it's So hard to climb back—it's hard to stop. Ah I everything—your own weight even drags you down! "

"I am sorry!" said Wickham Manners. "But you see my position. I am helpless. My duty is to my client."

From upstairs came melodious piano chords.

"Yes—but duty's easy when you're in clover; when you're on hard pan, sometimes it's a bitter, awkward word to spell. You don't know what it means to me—I'm desperate."

"Door!" said Wickham Manners to the servant answering.

Elmer Bring, leaning against the rails of the substantial house there under the stairs, muttered: "It's all up—it's all over! If the old fool of a woman hadn't gone to him I might have silenced her by fair means or-----" He clenched his fist as though it gripped some harbinger of silence. "Now, which is it to be—a bolt or a smash? If only that cursed Austen Lisle hadn't been there! I know—I know what I'll do—I'll wait and watch till he's cleared—then I'll go back—I don't care how late it is—and see if I can't tackle the other man—alone! "

Oh! the relief of it! to exchange that painful interview with duty warring with compassion—to leave the heavy, somewhat sombre library for the light and daintiness of Cissie Wickham Manners' drawing-room.

"You've been quite a time," she said, not crossly, but plaintively. "Only that Miss Sylvester let me coax her to come in and play something, I should have been quite cross—or sleepy—or both. I'll tell you what—I think we shall want one of those brass plates on this door as well as at Lincoln's Inn Fields. You know, 'Office hours ten till six."

"Awfully sorry, little woman—couldn't help it; not quite a routine matter—almost professional. I say, Austen, l am afraid we were very personal— once or twice. Cissie, Austen may smoke, mayn't he?"

"He may," laughed Mrs. Wickham Manners. "I don't think you deserve any indulgence."

"I don't deserve the dearest little missis in the world, but I've got her," he chuckled. "I say, don't you think you could manage to coax Miss Sylvester back again to give us some music? Such an awfully nice girl, Austen! She came as a lady help, and she's an exception in this respect; she is a lady— and she helps. Now, Cissie, do persuade her! "

"I'd like to, Jack," was the reply; "but I'm afraid it's hopeless—you know what a shy girl she is."

"What! " cried Austen Lisle, "in these days? Oh, then you must entice her down—we don't see wonders every day."

"You're a cynical wretch, Austen; and I've a good mind not to. In fact, I can't just, yet; she's putting the two wee birdies into their nests—tucking them up in bye-bye. And then she says she must mend Jackie's knickers. I should never have got her to come in just now, only she knew I was so lonely."

And husband and wife entered upon a joint and general panegyric of the paragon young person, the veritable angel of the house, who had entered into their midst as it were from the clouds, for there was an undeniable vagueness about her antecedents; who seemed endowed with the almost fairy gifts of patching up the children's quarrels as neatly as the rents in their pinafores, frocks, and knickers, making their music-lessons their delight instead of their despair, controlling them with a sweet and gentle influence suggestive almost of a spell, a bright white-magic.

Austen Lisle, so far from being bored by these encomiums, found it a novel experience, listening to praise instead of blame by the heads of a household towards one of the domestic staff, and was possessed of a strange yearning to set eyes on the paragon—this dodo, this blue dahlia, this white blackbird, and expressed himself accordingly.

By-and-by, Mrs. Wickham Manners, by no means loth to display her prize at the sound of a light footfall flitted across the room and called up the staircase: "Miss Sylvester! please, please come here, dear! The gentlemen are dying for some music. Oh! do be sweet and come and play something! "

There was a whispered colloquy respecting socks to be darned, music to be mended, accounts to be checked, letters to be written—Mrs. Wickham Manners's contributions to the discussion mainly consisting of "Bother! Let it wait," and "I won't let you tire yourself."

And in result, she, after a brief exit from the room, returned exultantly, exclaiming: "It's all right, Jack! Here she comes—the mending's got to wait. There's nobody here, Miss Sylvester—except a very, very old friend; such an old friend that we consider him nobody. Mr. Austen Lisle! Mr. Lisle—Miss Sylvester."

And Austen Lisle, advancing, suddenly halted and stood as though transformed to stone, face to face with—Pansy Annadale.

He stood there transfixed, astounded—yet swift as a flash, through all, over all his bewilderment came like an electric current, one thought, one warning: he must neither by word nor look betray surprise or recognition.

It was she—she! It was no spirit stood before him; never was there ghost had dimples; no wraith or ghost was ever garbed so daintily, neatly; sweet vision, bright angel that she was, she belonged to earth—not yet to Heaven.

Austen Lisle felt his great heart, his whole being, thrilled and filled with a transcending joy that she who stood before him there with downcast eyes, the peach bloom deepening in her dimpled cheek, and the red lips hiding the teeth that charmed almost as irresistibly''' as her eyes, was spared to life and love.

Ah, yes! even though that love were fated to remain mute, unspoken for ever and for ever, he knew he loved her—that love had come to him, strangely, once and for ever.

And she, standing there with downcast eyes, with a strange trembling at her heart, in every limb, in every nerve, seized with a great agitation that she foil certain must betray her. Ah! she recognised him.

Remember him? She had never forgotten him.

In that moment, sire thought, not of the accusing advocate forging against her, link by link, the chain of damming, though mistaken evidence ; no, she was remembering that summer morning that seemed so Jong ago—so many things, and such things had transpired since then—such drama, such tragedy had been enacted; was thinking of his glad song, his gay banter—then of his swift rush to her rescue, the contagious courage of his words.

But what was his mission now? To save her or destroy her?

Sue waited her fate, mute, almost like the maiden martyr at the stake, in the arena with the lion loosed upon her.

"So delighted with your music, even from a distance! I pleaded with my friend and hostess to prevail on you to favour us with more and nearer."

A sigh escaped her as from the martyr maiden when in the arena the lion crouched and caressed her feet.

Swift, almost unheeded glances, interchanged, said, on her side: "My fate is in your hands; is it spare or slay?" And on his, "Spare you! Ah! I would do much to save you."

He led her to the piano, turned the leaves for her, sat, as it were, entranced, listening to the music her fingers wakened from the keys, only wanting, only wailing to be alone with her to whisper to her words of warning, words of hope, to tell her that he was on her side, believing in her—never, never more against her, her knight and champion even to the death.

And at last—at last! the opportunity came. Cecilia, flitting from the room upon some household matter, called a moment to her husband.

It was a trifle—merely a letter from the boy at Rugby, pleading for a special tip, and, when that momentous matter had been very briefly settled, to the imminently soon satisfaction of the petitioner, Mrs. Wickham Manners whispered: "Jack, how interested they seem in each other! " "Who, dear? " asked her obtuser half.

"Why, Austen and Miss Sylvester. Didn't you notice? He seemed quite struck with her. At first I thought they, perhaps, had met before."' "No, dear," her husband answered, "I was thinking of other matters."

"I know—I know—of that man who called just after dinner. I wish that he had not called here; don't let him come again. Oh, Jack! she is such a nice girl! Do you know? I've never taken to anyone more spontaneously—wouldn't it be splendid for her?" "What castles are you building? What matches are you making—in the air?" exclaimed her husband. "My good woman, just consider! Nice girl as she is—what do we know of her, of her connections, of her family, her—anything? And Austen Lisle—with 'silk' waiting for him to ask for, a future Crown Officer, a future judge, with dozens of women of position interested in him? My dear, fairy stories are charming, but they don't always fit the circumstances of this prosiac world."

Meantime Austen Lisle met the challenging, pleading, wistful gaze, and, leaning across the piano, he whispered: "Oh, it's you! it's you! You don't know how grateful I am to God. I've never known a peaceful hour till now, since that day you disappeared—out of the dock."

"Found guilty! " she almost wailed. "Guilty—on the case you laid before them! "

"Ah! but I only knew what was supplied to me in black arid white, as sworn, and sworn again orally before me. I never knew that it was you until you faced me across the spiked rail of that felon dock. I never lived such bitter hours—my duty never was so stern."

"I know—I understand," she answered. "They told me how gently you struck, what little heart you threw into your task, and that it was your last words saved me from the law's dread last penalty."

"Alt, you knew that—you felt that! But if you only knew how, when it was all over, something seemed to tell me you were innocent, that it was all blunder or crime that overshadowed you, how I set to work. Yes! analysing everything by later lights, scheming out, almost to the end, a new' line of defence for you. And then there came the appalling news of—you understand. And when that blow fell on me they thought that it had killed me! "

He hushed his voice at the sound of returning footsteps, of the gay, glad voices. Only, in a whisper, he added, swiftly: "But you must be careful! That man, that liar, that perjurer, I believe—that rogue and thief I know —Elmer Bring, has been here—may be here again! '' She repressed her sudden terror as Jack and Cecilia approached. In her ear, more swiftly still, Austen Lisle breathed one last whisper: "Can I see you alone—even for a few minutes?" "Yes," she answered—wondering when and where and how.

Ere those puzzles had been solved the door opened, and she seemed rapt in the music she was playing.

It was scarce eleven when Austen Lisle departed from the house; scarcely a minute past when Mrs. Wickham Manners's lady help volunteered to slip out with the letter answering affirmatively that petition from Rugby School. Throwing a wrapper round her shoulders, she flitted to the nearest pillarbox, and there, beside it in the lamp-light, she faced---Elmer Dring!

The man for his part turned as if to fly; only terror held him paralysed.

"It's—it's true!" he whispered, horasely; "the dead can come back. I've tried not to believe it— said to myself that you—and Gideon would only come back—in my dreams."

And then—she gave a gasping cry.

He passed his hand across his brow in a wild amaze. He drew a deep, slow breath.

Why, then, there was some wonderful blunder somewhere. It was an image of flesh and blood, living, breathing, that stood before him—not a vision come back out of the unseen to appal him— step by step to drive him on to the brink of the terrible abyss he felt rather than knew to be awaiting him—nearer every day, every moment nearer.

She had not perished! No matter what had happened—he knew not, cared not what the details, the in-between, might be—she had not died. There was one stain the less upon his guilty soul. To know d for certain, to confirm the wild exultant assurance leaping in his heart, and make it double sure, forward he sprang with outstretched hand to touch her —to feel the contact of her living flesh.

And she, at the touch, as at a reptile's sting, drew back her hand, brushing with the other the place he had touched.

"So you got away—somehow—and everybody thought you were amongst the others."

Then one by one details flashed across his brain —pieced one by one together.

The house she had left was Wickham Manners's— the house he was waiting to return to. Austen Lisle had left it. Elmer had crouched in the shadow as he passed him only a few minutes back.

The letter Pansy had just posted and that his eyes had followed in stupefaction, had borne the name Wickham Manners. His exultation gave another wilder leap, and swift there flashed across his brain one predominating reflection—not of thankfulness for that one stain less, but a suggestion shaping into a scheme.

She was going back into that house wherein they lay. He could indicate the room and the position, within the room, of the safe that held the documents that dammed him, to her, the girl who had escaped, how he neither knew nor cared, from the .durance to which he had hounded her—to which he again could hound her, during his Majesty's pleasure— that was the Court's decree—nor had his Majesty revoked his pleasure.

His Majesty's pleasure—that was the penalty still awaiting her; that was the rod Chance had placed in Elmer's hand to wield in terror over her.

The star of hope gleamed bright again within his breast as he beheld ahead of him the means by newer villainies to evade the consequences of villainy already done.

He remembered, too, that will of Gideon Abbs— the will that, believing Pansy dead, leaving no relatives, he had looked upon as waste-paper. Jane Collins must get possession of that will as she had promised to; then he would hold two trump cards in his hand.

Put one trick at a time!

"So you're not dead, after all!" he went on, still in a vehement undertone. "What a bit of luck—for me—and what a blow for Jane! You're going back to that house?"

"Yes," Pansy murmured ; "unless you hinder me. Them's a haven for me there, Mr. Dring—there's safety and kindness there. Ah! you've done me wrong enough. Even your bitterness towards me, for Heaven only knows what cause, has been assuaged by now. You'll let me go my way—you won't harm me any more?"

"No, I won't hinder you, Pansy," he answered, unctuously. "I won't prevent your going back to that house you call your haven—not I! I wouldn't be so unreasonable, so hard-hearted; it wouldn't suit my book. Oh, yes, Pansy, my dear—after all, you're just as pretty as ever—you shall go back. I want you to go back. You can help me wonderfully by going back. . . .

"One good turn deserves another, Pansy. You play my game—I'll play yours. I'll hold my tongue—I'll never breathe a word; only a bargain, to be valid, requires a consideration. You mayn't know that, but that's law—common law and common sense; a consideration, Pansy, value received, Pansy. It may be in malt, but it's the consideration makes the bargain binding.'' "What is your consideration?" answered Pansy, in a quiet, steady tone, wondering what particular variety of iniquity was now fructifying in this villain's malignant brain.

"A mere bagatelle, my dear. The master of that house, though he may be kind to you—you see, you're a pretty girl—men will be men! "

He rubbed his hands and chuckled.

"Mr. Dring, try to remember that men neither need me, nor are they all—Elmer Drings."

"You little spitfire! There's some of the vixen left in you yet. I was going to say the master of that house, your friend, is my enemy. That man holds two documents which are as dangerous to me, Pansy, as my knowledge of your antecedents is to you. Do you understand? Don't you see that that man holds a rod in terrorem over me?—just as I hold one over you ! I want you to snatch that rod out of his hand."

"What do you mean?"

"You know the room he calls his library? * You know the little private safe let into the wall? Those documents arc in that safe. I'll give you full description of them. Now, you must get at that safe— somehow you must get hold of the keys and-----"

"Rob my benefactors—betray those who trust me —return evil for good—repay kindness, generosity, with treachery! Elmer Dring—God knows that I have suffered much, but even my suffering, thank God! has not so changed me."

"You see that policeman? I've only to beckon him—to say a dozen words—and he arrests you as an escaped convict."

"Then beckon him. Speak your words! Send me back to endure the penalty of another's crime — during the pleasure of his Majesty—that perhaps you can do. One thing you cannot do—you cannot make me the reptile that you are!"

The constable came nearer—nearer. In passing, he glanced inquiringly at the girl with the troubled as well as pretty face talking there by the lamp-post with the old man, whose back was towards him.

But that old man said not even one word as he passed. On the contrary, he paused there, baffled and irresolute, until the slow footbeats died away.

"I know what I'll do," he said, "I'll follow you back to the house—I'll tell Wickham Manners whom he is harbouring'—I will. If you won't play my game—I 'll spoil yours. Defy me if you dare! "

She leaned against the pillar-box as though rebooting. And Elmer Dring, deeming that she wavered and seeking to follow up his advantage, went on: "I swear I will, Pansy. Now—think it well over. Remember what you've gone through—fancy how you'd like to go back to it. Think of your surroundings now—think of those you've escaped—those that I can send you back to. What I ask won't harm you—it won't be a farthing out of his pocket; you're not robbing him—you're only keeping him from being spiteful, from crushing me. . . .

"You won't! Then by all's that—unholy, I'll crush you! I will! I swear I will! I'll go straight to him now—now. Remember—you've only got to say the word—you've only got to promise, to stay me! If you won't, I'll denounce you.' Once I enter that door, the door of that house—your haven -—is closed to you for ever! "

And then, step by step, he made his way towards that house whose cosy, gleaming windows were the storm-beaten Pansy's harbour lights, pausing now and then to listen to her call, looking back for her to beckon him. Nearing the steps up to its portals, he called back through the stillness of the night: "I swear I will! "

Then he made as though to ascend the steps, and there he halted.

The threat had failed—the bluster had been futile.

But, never mind, there was one more trump-card left. The will of Gideon Abbs was no waste-paper now. He could see Wickham Manners, true—would temporise with him. Pansy in the land of the living, if she would not snatch the rod from that man's hands, would be herself a very potent rod to wield over the other man.

"I'd like to, but I mustn't give away the show for her just yet," he growled, as he retraced his stops. "I know these fools; they'd take her part. No, no! I'll send her hack—but not just yet, and not that way! " and he returned to the spot where he had left her standing.

But she was standing there no longer.

Rage and frantic terror filled once again his being.

"Pansy!" he called—then again louder and louder yet. But no answer came, and he looked vainly around for any sign of her.

Ting! The clock on the overmantel chimed the quarter.

"Good heavens! hasn't Miss Sylvester returned?" Mrs. Wickham Manners exclaimed.

Crossing to the stair-head, she called to the servants—receiving a negative answer. After a little fuming she resumed her book and Wickham Manners his pipe. At last, pettishly, she closed the volume.

"This isn't like Miss Sylvester," she said. "I call it a liberty to remain out without speaking to me— at this hour."

"It's certainly rather odd," said Wickham Manners, knocking out the ashes of his pipe.

And so they waited while the minute-hand crept slowly down, and at last the tiny chime rang out again, recording the half-hour.

Then Jack growled: "I wish to goodness that young person would come back—I want to lock up and get to bed."

"It's too bad," said Cecilia. "I'm quite cross with her—for giving me occasion to be cross with her. Anyway, we'd better send the maids to bed. We cannot wait longer."

"Confound it!" growled the lawyer, irresolutely. "Can't understand it. It's so unlike her. I say, it's just possible that something may have happened to her. I'll slip on my boots again and take a turn round the square."

And, donning a cap, he went out and strolled along the deserted pavement, looking to right and left.

Presently he returned with a puzzled expression.

"Haven't you seen her?" asked his wife.

"Not the least trace of her. I've been to the pillarbox. I'm dashed if I know what to make of it." Then he laughed a little nervously and jerkily. "I say, Cis—it would be rather odd, wouldn't it, if any of the forebodings of the people who warned us of the danger of taking people without references justified themselves, eh ? If the paragon young person who arrived so mysteriously from goodness knows where, departed mysteriously—goodness knows where! "

"Jack! Jack! Don't talk like that. You make me feel quite inclined to cry. How we should miss her—especially the children!"

"Gad! it'd be an awful joke; only it would be more than a joke if we missed anything else," he laughed, uncomfortably; for, though he was, naturally, by no means prone to suspicion, he was a lawyer—with experiences.

The three quarters—midnight—chimed. Faster the clock-hands seemed to wend their way her room, in every room in the house they for her; the whole household, now seriously perturbed, waited and watched for her till the long hours gave way to the small ones.

They interrogated the police-constable on the beat, and the mystery deepened when he reported having seen a young lady answering the description of Sylvester in conversation with a man whose back was towards him.

All through the night Mrs. Wickham Manners awoke listening for the knock at the door or the dinging of the bell that never came. Instead, the morning came without any sign or trace of the girl with the gentle voice, the gentle face, with the clever, deft, industrious hands.

They could scarcely believe that one who had so come amongst them could have left so strange a void in that household, that they could so much have missed that gentle presence.

They missed nothing else, and Wickham Manners was angry with himself for having voiced such a suggestion, and, ill at ease, he wondered if the case of Miss Sylvester was to be numbered amongst the mysterious disappearances ever and anon occurring in the midst of London's teeming millions.

Jane Collins was departing. Her wages had been paid. She had corded her boxes as strenuously as though each had been the neck of the master she was leaving.

She was going to leave Dassborough by the first train after lunch, and it was now just after breakfast.

Her face was whiter than ever with rage at the reflection that all her efforts to get level with her new master had been futile, that she had been tricked into perjury by him, into swearing hard and fast at Pansy's trial to the lies he had so cunningly sketched out. And this was the reward—dismissal at a month's notice, as though she had been a mere housemaid of a few weeks' service.

True there had been the gratification of sending that hussy of a girl almost to the scaffold—anyway, to prison for life—as it turned out, she deemed, to death, but that was beside the bargain. She had been fooled. That villain downstairs had flung to earth the ladder whereby he had reached his ends.

When she remembered the will there in the library bureau she almost wished the hussy of a girl had lived, anyway, long enough for Darrell to be dispossessed; but, aggravating to the end, she had perished just when she might have been of use to Jane, and so far Elmer had sent no news of any heir or next-of-kin to her having been discovered.

And now a few hours more and she would have left that Lone House, wherein she, for so many years, had had her way. and would be more powerless than ever to repay the grudge she nursed against man, who, having used her and her malice to his ends was flinging her aside anxious to be rid of her.

There he stood, down there on the new trim-kept lawn, chatting with Judex Esslin. That other tailor, who, for two pins, would swear away her liberty with his mad manic theories, just as he— and she—had sworn away Pansy's.

A telegraph-lad came hustling towards the gate, in his hand a tan-coloured envelope, from which he read, in a shout, a name: ''Collins!"

Jane flew down. Just in time to snatch it from the lad ere he had complied with her master's "Here you are." He was given to handling and scanning letters and telegrams, whether addressed to himself or others.

This time Jane's glance said, "No, you don't!"

She wouldn't even open it in his presence; instead she waited till she had regained the room, hers for so many years, for a few hours more. Then she said: ''will at any risk or cost immediately.— Elmer."

Then what had happened? Had Elmer, who was so clever at foraging amongst registers, tombstones, family Bibles, and so on, found that the hussy had some kith and kin still living? Oh, it would be delightful, even at the eleventh hour, to get quits with that good-looking vagabond down there, with the scornful look in his eyes and the contemptuous curl of his lips.

Yes, he was still down there on the lawn. In her pocket she fumbled for that rusty key. Then she crept down the staircase to the library.

Good luck! the doer was unlocked, and that brute of a Great Dane was crouched within the hall doors, regarding that master who seemed the only being not afraid of him and of whom only he was afraid. Stealthily she crept across towards the bureau, deftly slipped the key, which she with forethought had oiled, into the lock, pulled open the drawer.

Yes, it was still there.

In a moment she had thrust it within her bodice—closed and relocked the drawer. She stole from the room, and crept softly up the first few stairs, scrambled up the rest, and scuttling into her room, locked herself in, for she heard Lucifer, the Great Dane, with a growl, scamper up from below—his keen, pricked ears catching the sound of even her stealthy footsteps.

"Hallo, there!" she heard the hated voice of the man ceasing to be her master. "What ails you, Lucifer? What's wrong, lad?"

For answer the big hound only growled sullenly. Harvey Darrell glanced sharply round the room, gave here and there a tug at a box-lid or drawer-handle.

''Have any of you meddled with the dog?" he called, to his servants, and they answered: "No."

"Jane Collins!" he shouted—once—twice.

Then from above there came a snappish: "Well, what do you want now?"

"Have you been prowling down here? I know you hate this hound. Have you been meddling with him?"

"Not I—I hate the beast as I hate the devil—and some other people. As for prowling about your house—the sooner I prowl out of it the better—and the best time's now."

And she called loudly to the kitchen-boy to fetch a taxicab for her boxes.

In due time it arrived. Harvey Darrell watched her keenly descending the stairs, meaning to see her gone without a word. But as she passed him she said, between close-set teeth: "Good morning, master."

"Good morning," he said, curtly.

"You've got the place all to yourself now, master."

"Yes—fortunately. "

"For the time being."

"What do you mean? Hadn't you better clear without any insolence?"

"Insolence! "and she laughed, insolently. "Goodbye, master—for the present!"

"Good-bye, Collins," he said, drily. "My regards to Elmer."

"I'll be sure to give 'em," she said, with such emphasis that he set to work wondering, as he watched her descend the stairs.

What was in the wind? What was to be her next move? What was the hurry?

She had timed her departure for three hours later —and for the hundredth time he wondered what had she and Elmer Dring been whispering that night when he had shadowed them along the lane beside the Lone House.

He strode into the room he made his den, mechanically again tugged at this lid, this drawer, and that—particularly at one drawer of the old bureau.

Something glistening on the escutcheon of the keyhole caught his eye—he touched it—looked at his moistened finger—smelled it.

"Oil," he murmured.

Then swiftly he whipped out his keys—hung open the drawer.

The will was gone!

"Stop that woman!" he shouted down the stairs and through the window. Then to the Great Dane: "Lucifer! Hey, boy! Stop her!"

And, baying furiously, the huge hound scrambled up and off at his command.

Jane Collins, impedimenta laden, flung back the wicket with a gesture of defiance. She was shaking the dust of the Lone House from her feet just then under compulsion—before long perhaps it would be somebody else's turn. Her heart leaped with the consciousness of what she held concealed close to it.

Then fell, sheer and sudden as a plummet—at the sound of the Great Dane's menacing howl—at the sound of his swift, stampeding bound in her wake. Another moment, like a black and white streak he had whirled past her, had turned, was crouching between her and the cab-door, the handle of which the startled driver had let go—was growling and snarling with ominous bloodshot eyes, displaying menacing fangs within those cavernous, red jaws.

The trembling Jane welcomed even the arrival on the scene of Harvey Darrell, even although he laid an arresting hand upon her shoulder, commanding her to stay.

'What do you mean? Mind what you're doing! " :;he exclaimed. "Remember, I'm not a slave! No, not even a servant now! "

"But you're still one thing—you're a thief! "

"A what? You brute! You coward! Here— driver! you heard what he called me. Just fetch a policeman to hear it, too. Ah! here's Elmer Dring! Elmer, this man's just called me a thief!"

"And is going to search your boxes."

"He's going to search my boxes! What do you think I've stolen, Mr. A. V.—eh?"

He knit his brows thunderously, then laughed contemptuously. And Elmer Dring, who had hurried down to Dassborough, and who now considered it was his turn to take an innings, remarked: "There must be some mistake. Surely, Mr.— ahem!—Harvey Darrell has no intention of a gross interference with the liberty of the subject—particularly in the case of his late relative's trusted housekeeper? "

"Mr. Harvey Darrell intends to mind his own business and to brook no interference," said the other. "Now, Jane Collins, you know what you have stolen! "

The woman thus challenged replied with a glance of malignant exultation; then with another—a telegraphic look—met the inquiring gaze of Elmer Dring, who read plainly that his wire had been received and acted on.

"Stolen! That's a very ugly word to use," cried Jane.

"And in the presence of a solicitor," chimed in Elmer Dring.

"To say nothing of a third party," said Jane, with a meaning look at the taxi-driver, "who might find it worth his while to keep his ears and eyes open. Stolen indeed, Mr. Harvey Darrell, A. V. What have I stolen? Is it gold or silver, that you ripped down wainscots and tore up floors and hearthstones to find?"

"You know what you've stolen—a certain document from a certain drawer of the bureau in there. Not gold or silver, just a bit of paper—not worth a penny, Jane Collins. But I want it, and you don't move those boxes till it's given up."

"Oh, ho!" said Jane. Then to the taxi-driver: "Just put that black box on the seat."

But Harvey Darrell promptly placed his foot on the black box which Jane Collins seemed most anxious to remove. And at a look from his master the Great Dane checked the driver's movement with a significant growl.

Jane Collins, guessing the drift of his suspicion, began to manifest a feverish anxiety to get that box away.

"You can keep all the rest," she said. "But I want that one; there are some—some keepsakes in it."

"I'll keep your keepsakes, Jane, unless—you give me up that document. Come, come! I'll do a deal with you. I'll compound the larceny; it's only worth its value as waste-paper, but I'll give you a tenner for it."

And Elmer Dring said, unctuously folding his hands: "What generosity! A tenner for a document not worth the paper that it's written on. You observe, Jane, so valueless that your late respected master could scarce recover it by legal process, since de minimis non curat lex, which means, Jane, that the law won't trouble its wise head over trifles."

Harvey Darrell, ignoring Elmer, repeated his offer: "Come, come! a tenner for that paper!"

And Jane inquired, with exasperating vacuousness : "What paper?"

"You know, you old baggage—the will of Gideon Abbs. It's no good to you. Do you think I shouldn't have destroyed it if it had been of any use to anyone—but with Pansy dead, leaving no relatives, it's null and void."

"And you'll give me ten pounds for it?" laughed Jane, raucously. "Ten pounds for what's worth nothing. Come along, Elmer, we'll send the police after my boxes ; we'll be going—unless he means to set his hound on us. He'd like to, if he dared."

She had stepped into the taxicab; Elmer had followed.

"Drive to the Station Hotel," she said.

Harvey Darrell paused, irresolute, wondering how much Jane Collins, who had addressed him meaningly as A. V., really knew, feeling uncomfortably conscious that for once he had been, perhaps, precipitate.

"I'll send the policeman for my boxes," said Jane, keeping up her assumption of anxiety to the last. "Now are you going to let me take that black one? You can hold all the rest."

"You can send for them," he said. "Meantime I mean to ransack them."

"The station! " said jane to the taxi-driver. And she whispered something else to Elmer Bring, whose face lit up as he turned to Harvey Darrell, and in a voice of quiet triumph, said: "Good afternoon, A. V., or rather, au revoir. It would have been a shame to have sold you for ten pounds something not worth the paper that it's written on—with Pansy dead; but something worth a hundred thousand pounds—with Pansy Armadale alive! "

Pansy Armadale alive!

Darrell, standing there irresolute for a while, felt a wild thrill at his heart. What did Elmer mean?

Was it a piece of empty bluff, designed to move him to render up those hostages? Oh! if it were only true!

Should he speed up the receding taxi, and even at that last moment drag the flabby lawyer rogue from where he sat, clenching his hands upon his throat until for once the truth was wrenched from him ?

Not too long he hesitated—the taxi turned the bond. Pansy was dead—Elmer's words were surely only bluff—the empty bluff of a baffled, beaten man.

"Hi! you there!" he called to the man-servant. "Carry these things indoors—bring me a chisel and a mallet."

Then for an hour or so he knelt among the litter and debris of Jane's ravaged boxes, turning the contents over and over, finding no trace of Gideon Abbs's stolen will, but faced with the consciousness that Jane had tricked him—and that she and Elmer Dring were becoming dangerous.

Meanwhile the precious pair, the subjects of his thoughts, en route to the railway-station, discussed their plans. Elmer, anxious to be upon the track of Pansy, suggested they should repair forthwith to London.

But Jane was firm, not to say obdurate. At Dassborough Elmer could put up the banns or give the necessary notice to the Registrar at once; in a new district, residential qualification would be necessary. And at the Station Hotel she took up her quarters and her stand, though trains might come and trains might go, and Elmer might go on for ever.

Nor would she entrust even her Elmer with that will, betraying rather a due appreciation of the gentleman's character than of blind and touching confidence in his integrity.

When he asked: "How would the world go on if everyone were as incredulous as you?" she answered: "It would have 'gone much better for you, Elmer -—so many people would not have trusted you, and you would not have run so many risks of doing time."

Elmer quoted sundry proverbs; Jane replied with others.

'More haste, less speed,' " quoth he.

"Never put off till to-morrow what can be done to-day," she retorted.

"Marry in haste and repent at leisure,' " he said. " bind, safe find,' " she answered.

"lente," he urged. "That is, make slowly."

"Delays are dangerous/' said Jane.

"Suppose we wait, dear Jane," he suggested, "until I have tracked down Pansy."

"Suppose we don't!" promptly responded Jane, conjuring visions of Elmer happening on Pansy, the , and selling secrets to her, coming to terms with her, possibly taking steps to undo the wrongs that he had done her, harbouring once again the designs that she knew he had harboured in Gideon's lifetime.

Since the news of her supposed untimely fate a great revulsion of feeling had arisen—people were talking, especially in the locality, of the heroism displayed by the girl in the hour of supreme agony and peril, of her resourcefulness, self-sacrifice, the act and surpassing courage whereby she had saved the little Enid, the glorious altruism of her last reckless dash back into the flames to save the poor, demented creature who had threatened her own life. These things, they were saying, were incompatible with instincts and motives such as had been attributed to her, such as an erring human had convicted her of being swayed by.

And her erstwhile custodian, the father of Enid, was moving heaven and earth to have justice done even to the memory of the girl who he believed had died after so nobly rescuing his child. Pansy found to be alive, Jane Collins was haunted by a conviction that his Majesty's pleasure would speedily take the shape of his Majesty's pardon. Even the prospect of turning the tables on Harvey Darrell hardly reconciled Jane to such a turn of Fortune's wheel for Pansy!

Later in the clay the lady's stronger will prevailed.' Elmer attended to the registry, and notice of the contemplated marriage was forthwith given. Then Elmer Bring set to work a-thinking—wondering and scheming how to find Pansy Armadale, and, this done, how to lose Jane Collins.

And, thinking out these things, he journeyed back to town.

All through his work next day Austen Lisle with impatience longed to get it over. When at last, at four o'clock, the Court he was addressing rose, he hurried back to chambers, determined to cut short as possible his consultations and, dropping, in, as was frequently his wont, at the Wickham Mannerses for five o'clock tea, steal by hook or by crook an interview with Pansy.

For meantime he had sketched out a course for her to follow. She must disclose her identity to those beneath whose roof she lived; it would not be hard for her to make a clean breast of her story to a good soul like Cecilia, with whom, at all events, her secret would be safe. Even if she or Jack Wickham Manners felt any scruples about harbouring her, as to which Austen had few misgivings, there was always Nannie Nepean.

Come what might, with a straight man and a straight woman like Jack and Cecilia, all must be straight and above board.

Returning to his chambers, he scrambled through his consultations, had just exchanged his bands for the cravat of ordinary civilisation, and Herbert had just despatched his junior for a taxi when a familiar step came bounding up the staircase—and into his room dashed Jack Wickham Manners.

"Austen!" he cried, "so deuced glad I've found you here!"

"You're only just in time," replied the other. "Another minute and I should have been hustling towards your house to ask Cecilia for some tea, and probably discuss a rather strange affair with both of you."

"I've come to discuss a very strange affair with you, Austen, and I bring strange news. Something mysterious has happened at the house. You know Miss Sylvester, the girl we thought so much of, who charmed you with her playing?"

"Yes, yes! what of her?" asked Austen, in strange agitation.

"She has gone! "

"Gone! When? Where?"

And-Wickham Manners answered: "She left our house last night, scarce two minutes after you, and none of us has set eyes on her, nor has any trace of her been discovered since."

Last night—scarce a few minutes after he had left!

Then Austen Lisle remembered the crouching form skulking in the shadows by the railings, just as he hailed and sprung into a passing taxi, remembered the wonder flitting across his brain—was it the form of Elmer Dring, and why was he skulking there? And now events had answered him. It had been Elmer crouching in those shadows like a ghoul, and no matter what his design, this he for certain had effected: he had lured or frightened Pansy Armadale away.

Oh, if only he, Austen, had loitered to watch him; if that taxi, whose appearance he had voted such a lucky chance, had not rattled by and borne him clubwards—if only! only if! How slight, how fitful, and how chanceful the winds that waft our destinies like thistle-down!

But the first step was to tell Jack Wickham Manners who the girl known as Miss Sylvester was, leaving him in turn to tell Cecilia. So far from this news awakening any spirit of resentment or repulsion, all that happened was that their sympathy for Pansy intensified, and their belief in her innocence was strengthened.

The next, again to interview the constable upon the beat, and make the most of what was left of that casual survey of the man whose back was towards him. And, by comparing height and appearance, and particularly by the constable's recollection that the gentleman had white, wavy hair falling on to his collar, Austen's own theory was confirmed. Elmer Dring had encountered her—had scared or taken her away.

It was no very difficult task for the eminent solicitor and famous barrister to set all available machinery of investigation in motion, but this had to be done very tactfully, since they, although anxious to avail themselves of Scotland Yard's assistance to trace the young lady known as Miss Sylvester, by no means desired to put Scotland Yard upon the track of Pansy Armadale!

By-and-by came news of such a girl having been seen hurrying through a certain square, as if fearful of pursuit, and of one answering the description wandering later listlessly along the thoroughfares farther off; of, at a later hour, at a more distant point, such a girl, evidently worn and tired, buying a cup of coffee at a stall, seeming a lady from the way she asked and expressed her thanks for it— and presumably "straight," they said, from the way she shrank from the intrusiveness of some who passed remarks—hooligans, one wearing a much displaced dress-tie, another neither cravat nor collar.

Both stallkeeper and policeman remembered noticing her, because they had both definitely advised both said hooligans to leave her alone.

So Austen Lisle picked up clues of her here and there, following which he traced her from district to district.

Later that same night, while Wickham Manners awaited in Bryanston Square Austen's return, and started up alert at the sound of the doorbell, the servant entered and announced—not Mr. Lisle, but - the more unexpected Mr. Elmer Dring.

"You know," said Wickham Manners, "this sort of thing is quite irregular; my client's instructions are very definite, and unless you are here to make restitution you ought not to be here at all."

"I'm here to pave the way to restitution," said Elmer Dring. "I'm here to ask you to hold your hand—oh I only such a little while, and I'll repay every penny that I owe your client, with handsome interest. Events have happened that I never dreamed of. Only give me just a few days, and my position will be altered—I shall be on velvet."

This time Elmer Dring believed it himself—since within the last few hours Harvey Darrell had waylaid him, had bartered with him for the possession of that will. For Jane Collins, whom Darrell first had approached, had—lest he should with his own hands with violence search her and tear from her the will— declared that Elmer held it.

Darrell had offered a price for it; a big price, which, it being refused, he had doubled—had trebled when Elmer had sworn that Pansy was alive —that, he was on his way to meet her.

Yes, Elmer dreamed he stood on velvet. Even if Pansy, when he found her, refused his terms he would make terms with Harvey Darrell.

"Indeed," said Wickham Manners, drily. "What guarantee have we of that—except your word, a form of assurance which, you will excuse me remarking, my client has not found too reliable."

"I know, I know! I've been the victim of circumstances; but circumstances have altered— peculiarly. I am here with a double purpose; I want to ask about someone in whom I'm interested, a young lady who's been staying here."

"Ah, yes," said Wickham Manners, eyeing him keenly. "What of her?"

"On her everything depends, as far as I am concerned ; for if I can lay my hands on her I can square your client's claim twice over."

Wickham Manners, listening to and watching Elmer Dring, wondered what special variety of fraud or lie was he just then concocting. He could understand his wanting to hound down the helpless girl for malicious motives, but how the discovery of her could benefit Dring he failed to comprehend— seeing that she could not buy his silence.

"Suppose you leave off talking in parables, Mr. Dring," he said. "And suppose you tell me all you know about Miss Sylvester, and how by tracing her you expect to place yourself upon a sound financial basis?"

Elmer for a few moments paused, undecided how to begin his story, and ere his indecision was at an end, the man-servant entered and, before Wickham Manners by a sign could silence him, had announced Austen Lisle. And at the sound of that name Elmer changed his tactics and his mind.

Austen Lisle again! Austen Lisle, who knew the girl's indentity—who perhaps was on her track!

"I'll call again to-morrow, Mr. Wickham Manners," he said.

Then he withdrew—again to watch and wait there in the shadows of the square; watching for Austen Lisle, waiting to shadow him.

Midnight once more—and Pansy found herself still homeless and weary almost unto death. For, little recking who and what awaited her, she had flitted out of the house that had been her haven of comfort unprepared for any journey, scarcely a shilling in her pocket.

Morning came and found her wandering—noon, and she wandered still; and when the noonday sun was sinking, faint with hunger as well as weariness, she wandered on, pausing ever and anon to snatch a little rest—then to escape notice journeying on again, not with any settled destination, not even with any settled route, but on and on, knowing neither whither nor whence she journeyed till the dusk, deepened into dark, and from tower and steeple came longer and longer chimes.

And at last under Night's star-spangled purple robe she stood alone upon the "bascule" of the Tower Bridge, leaning wearily and worn out upon its parapet, watching with dull eyes the myriads of stars move, the myriad lights twinkling to right and left below, and the big river shrouded deep down there in the dark with the shadows ever and anon of big ships gliding to and from far lands.

Ah the world for her seemed dark. The little light that seemed so very far away—too far to be reached—the forces of despair were closing round her, were crushing her irresistibly down—down to there in the dark where the darker shadows flitted.

She thought of Tantalus, for ever mocked with luscious fruits just beyond the reach of his parched lips- the while his being was consumed with thirsty fever.

What had she done? Nothing of any harm. And since she, harmless, guiltless, was thus to be tortured, why not the darkness of swift moments leading to oblivion, rather than the darkness of more waiting—more agony?

Oblivion ? Looking up she saw a star. Ah, well! worst or best, it might be better—could it be worse down there than—what remained?

And in the wilful blindness of her despair she gave one wailing cry for forgiveness, clenched the rail, closed her eyes, and nerved herself to one mad soring.

A hand was laid upon her arm—a strong, restraining hand, albeit its hold was kindly. A voice called swiftly, "Pansy, stay!" a strong, compelling voice, for all its tone was tender, and in her heart awoke responsive, tender chords.

For it was his voice.

"Pansy," he whispered, "you weren't thinking— weren't contemplating—that?"

And he placed around her a sheltering arm. Within it she nestled close to his heart, feeling safer there, murmuring: "No, no! please God!—only, the darkness seemed to gather round me."

Then she let him lead her from her Bridge of Sighs, her bruised and wounded heart soothed by his gentle words and ways, out of the darkness into the light, warmth, and comfort; back from despair to rest and hope, back to the haven she had left.

And Cecilia Wickham Manners, opening wide her door, her arms, her true Englishwoman's heart, enfolded within them that poor, weary, trembling dove of the draggled plumage and the wearied pinions—but, thank Heaven! unsoiled.

When that open, hospitable door closed behind Austen Lisle and the girl he had brought back within it, Elmer Dring, deeming he had shadowed well and wisely, again approached, even at that late hour.

It was Jack Wickham Manners himself who faced him on the threshold, demanding what he wanted there at that untimely hour.

"I want to come to terms with you, Wickham Manners."

"For what?"

"For the possession of those two documents."

"Well, then, you know the terms—restitution."

"I've an alternative proposal. But the doorstep isn't the place for one professional man to interview another."

"Nor is one a.m. the hour. You know my offices and my office hours. Good night ! "

lie was about to close the door when the other, stepping forward with outstretched hand, said: "No, no! not yet. Look here! I've tracked that girl back here. These are my terms: those documents placed in my hands—and mum's the word. "

"Leave my doorstep! I value your silence no more than your word."

"Then I'll speak—I'll play the devil! Only a word from me, and back she goes."

"Perhaps not. Remember she is not friendless now. Now take your foot from off my threshold— I am going to close my door."

"Then you defy me? She defies me?"

For answer he was pushed back, and would have fallen down the steps but that he clutched the railing.

"Wickham Manners, don't be a fool! I tell you I have information I can sell her—information well worth buying—I can take it elsewhere. You don't know what harm I can do her. You don't know what she stands to lose, nor what she stands to win!"

His answer was the click of the latch, and the thudding of the lock and bolts, as the door closed on him. For a while he stood there inarticulate— beside himself in a paroxysm of baffled fury.

"Very well, then! " he gasped, in a spasm at last. "It's war—war to the knife between me and that quarter. Never mind; there's Harvey Darrell left. Curse him! I hate him, loathe him, but he shall play my game—he shall win me my revenge—and she shall lose her fortune and her liberty! "

Yes; it was quite like old times, Judex Esslin and Elmer Dring agreed, seated once again vis-a-vis in that room at the old house—the very room, Judex reminded Elmer, in which they for the last time had sat with Gideon Abbs, had each in turn played chess with him on that eventful night, the last on which Gideon had played any game.

And although Elmer Dring was evidently anxious to change the drift of the conversation, Judex still kept harping on it persistently as Hamlet harped upon the daughter of Polonius. And Harvey Darrell seemed to find the doctor's vein of reminiscence.

"I remember," Esslin was saying, "how strangely keen the old man was that night." Didn't Elmer remember how indignant the old man was with over the interest due? Judex never could understand that, for, mentioning the matter one day to blinders, the latter declared with much emphasis that he had paid the old hunks every penny.

Yes, yes; Elmer was quite prepared to admit that the old man's brain was beginning to wander, but he kept his eyes away from Harvey Darrell's keen ones fixed on him steadily. Yes; Harvey Darrell was clearly in the mood to encourage the doctor's vein of reminiscence, albeit Elmer's mood was opposite.

That missing dagger, with its snake-like hilt, hanging there on the wall Elmer tried in vain to keep his eyes away from, the old man's asseveration that Pansy had stolen it—all these details he encouraged Esslin to dwell upon, loosening the doctor' s tongue to further garrulity by means of the whisky bottle.

"Don't be afraid or it, doctor—it's like our friend Elver's jokes, well-matured."

know—I know'! How times have changed here! Do you remember, Elmer, how the old man used to dole it out in that wretched little phial, holding just three portions, as he used to call them? — just about as much as one would get for sixpence at a railway bar—the old hunks! "

"And do you think he believed she had stolen that poniard?" Harvey asked, filling the tumbler halfway up with the mellowed, soft, insidious old spirit that went down so silkily, and whose potency was only realised when the drinker rose.

"Believed it? It was proof to me he disbelieved it—the very fact of his saying it. I believed it, but he didn't; that was strange, wasn't it? When I used to say, 'Quite right, Mr. Abbs, that girl's got the klepto taint,' he used to jeer at me; it seems a judgment on him, doesn't it? He once said Pansy was the only honest soul about him, and that he used to call her thief because he knew it hurt her so; that was his mania—hurting people."

"The old—that is my respected relative—doesn't seem to have been very extensively lamented," said Harvey Darrell. "In parts I've been in a man like that would have met with—an accident—at a much earlier age."

"What parts? " asked his listeners, simultaneously.

But he answered, drily: "Oh! various parts."

"It was a pity, though, that she went so far—if she did go so far," said Esslin, reflectively.

"If? Surely not much virtue in that 'if,' " said Harvey Darrell. "But leaving the 'if' alone, let us have the why?"

And he refilled the doctor's glass.

"Well," said Esslin, "I had mapped out things very differently for her. It was my design to have married her."

Both his companions eyed him intently.

"With all her imperfections on her head?" asked Harvey.

"Well, yes—I meant to make a study of her; men ought to study their wives. I should have demonstrated several of my theories. I meant to have developed such symptoms of latent aberrations as I suspected, diagnosing, observing, and recording, day by day, and step by step."

"I see," said Harvey, "you contemplated a sort of mental vivisection. How cheerful for the lady of your choice!"

"I daresay she would have found her position irksome at times; but then, the martyrs of Science must net complain of the thorns in their crowns. Besides," he added, "Gideon Abbs had five thousand pounds of hers," and he re-emptied the tumbler Harvey had again refilled.

"It's getting late," said Elmer. "Have you finished all your visits? "

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Esslin, somewhat weirdly, a strange light glittering in his eyes. "He wants to get rid of me just as he did the night we're talking about. My visits don't take me long, nowadays; patients don't like me. I know too much; they fight shy of a man who finds them subject to worse things than they call him in for. An idiot who wants to be cured for dyspepsia objects to being told he's subject to congenital cerebral paralysis. I've lost my most lucrative patient through telling his wife I saw dipsomania in his eye; she wanted to pretend he was a pillar of total abstinence. One old fool said he'd kick me out of the house, because I told his attendant to watch him for suicidal monomania."

He glanced significantly at his empty glass, then at the whisky decanter, and Harvey Darrell making no responsive sign, assisted himself—liberally.

After an awkward pause the doctor laughed a long, low, vacuous laugh with no meaning in it— only the pretence of much meaning.

"You fellows want me to clear out—I know—I'm a min' reader, it's my business to analyse th' mind, mos' int'resting business, too, bit ghastly—sometimes. You'd hardly credit it, old Elmer there ought to be in a strait jacket. But I'll clear—it's your turn this time, Elmer, to outstay me. Goo' night, Darrell; only, remember your late, lamented relative, he was very mean—if he hadn't been so mean he wouldn't have groped about in the dark to save the electric light. And if he hadn't groped in the dark—it mightn't have happened. . . .

"I say, Elmer, if we'd been wide awake we should have ripped up the floors before Darrell came on the scene. Always used to wonder why the old man was always hammering at a loose plank. Goo' night—don't trouble to ring—I'll let m'self out! "

He lurched out of the room with an idiotic hiccough.

"Mind the stair!" grinned Elmer; then to Darrell: "Hadn't you better see him out?"

"Why should I trouble? He knows the way."

"But he might pitch down that winding flight and break his neck."

"All the less reason I should trouble," guffawed Harvey, taking another cigarette. "Now, Elmer, what's it all about? Cut it short! "

The possibilities of that staircase seemed to be appreciated by Judex Esslin, who, if one may invert the metaphor, avoiding the danger of a middle course, found safety in hugging the Scylla of the banisters, except when clutching the Charybdis of the handrail.

"The man who designed this staircase had a decided homicidal tendency," he hiccoughed, gravely. "All the servants gone to bed! Most discourteous method of speeding a parting guest."

Reaching the lower landing, he noticed through the door ajar a glimmering light, paused a moment, peered in. Then stealthily he entered, scanning the walls, particularly the old panelling, thinking of the aged miser who had, in the old house, hugged his hoard.

Tut the walls now were bright with varnish; such of the old woodwork as was left had been very carefully inspected. Mr. Harvey Darrell had been there.

Mentally steadying himself, by a supreme effort, Judex Esslin,,on tiptoe, toured the room, his beady, black eyes now gleaming with strange fires, scanning every corner, every crevice.

Then of a sudden he replaced his foot upon the hearthstone, which had seemed to yield—ever such a trike—beneath it.

Yes! it was loose. He suppressed a whistle.

Glancing round the room, his eye caught a massive brazen paper-knife, and in a moment, grasping it in both hands, he had knelt beside the hearth, and noiselessly lifted away the fender.

Then, with a cautious glance at the open door, he listened to the hum of the voices upstairs. Yes, they were both still there.

With his improvised implement he prised the ill-set hearthstone, which gave and gave and lifted, until at last he had grasped it with the fingers of one hand—then of both. Silently, laboriously, he lifted it right up on edge, when the fires in his eyes doubled, trebled, blazed up with the reflection of the glimmering japanned tin cases, lying there, closely packed together. Cash-boxes without a doubt, stuffed with Treasury notes and Bank of England notes!

One feverish hand clutched at a box, then withdrew, and he caught his breath at the clink he had made.

Patience, patience! Most haste here indeed would mean less speed.

Then—hark!—he started at a strange, stealthy sound. Looking up, he listened—the hum of voices still continued, still distant.

But that other sound—that stealthy slither each moment more distinct—nearer—nearer! was coming up, not down; was at the door, the door which moved—swayed inwards !

And then of a sudden one sound gave way to another—the sound of a menacing, deep-chested growl! And there within the room, with eyeballs reflecting that glimmering light like mingled blood and fire, crouched the Great Dane, with fangs disclosed—ready for the spring!

"So, that's your game and that's the state of it?"

said Harvey Darrell. "Well, fair's fair. If I keep you out of one pitfall you must help me out of another. Where did you say the girl was?"

"I didn't say at all," replied Elmer, cautiously. "You bet I'm not going to—just yet awhile."

"Have you get the will on you?"

"No," sold Elmer Dring. "It occurred to me it would be more prudent not to bring it. Esslin's a while going out—perhaps he's left the door "More likely he's gone to sleep upon the landing," said Harvey Darrell.

"Is more anybody about to see him out?"

"He'll be seen out," snapped Harvey Darrell. "Someone will see to that."

"But suppose he left the door open and anyone come in?"

"Someone will see to that also."

Elmer, crossing the room, glanced outside the door.

"Ex ubundanle cautela,' " he said, reclosing the door and resuming his seat. "Now—yes or no?"

"You want too much, Elmer; it's your way."

"It's everybody's way. Some get it—that's the distinction between clever people—and others."

"Yes," grinned Harvey Darrell, "men are mostly beasts of prey or beasts of burden. We don't like burdens, Elmer."

"We should be asses if we did," returned Elmer Dring. "But come—is our bargain on or off?"

"My good man, five minutes' consideration isn't unreasonable in a matter involving ten thousand pounds."

"Five thousand when I deliver up the will—the other five when I deliver up the girl."

"Y-yes," said the other, musingly. "I suppose the cheques had better be separate."

"There won't be any cheques," rejoined Elmer, firmly; "it will be notes."

"A flimsy precaution," said Harvey. "But stay, Elmer, suppose I tell you to go to the devil with your will and your information—sooner or later you will in due course—but I am referring to the present matter. How's that girl going to prove that will? As soon as she comes into the light she's nabbed."

"And that's what she won't do," responded Elmer. "If I deal with her, instead of with you, she'll find some pleasant spot where extradition treaties don't extend; then on her behalf an agent, who may be Elmer Dring, will prove the will and get in the dibs." ' "I see! " the other nodded. "And so I guess you guess you've got me set?"

"I think so.." replied Elmer Dring, "else you bet I shouldn't have come here alone. Of course I know what's in your mind—I'm here alone; you're about as void of scruples as they make 'em. A pistol-shot in the Lone House would scarce be heard outside."

''The other man met with a quieter quietus, Elmer Dring—eh?"

"Yes," murmured Elmer, keeping his eyes away from that wall.

"Sorneone came very quietly behind him with a handled dagger."

"Yes," feebly nodded Elmer. "There have been two verdicts as to that. You don't suppose you can go behind them?"

"There's nothing sure in life—save death," smiled Harvey Darrell. "But as you say, this matter's business. This time you've got me treed—this time, Elmer, I must come down."

"I knew you'd------ Hallo! what's that?"

Both men started at the weird sound of a man's shout mingling with the howl of a beast, a crashing fall as of a general upheaval and overheaving of furniture.

"What the devil's that?" faltered Elmer Dring, trembling fearfully in every limb.

And Harvey Darrell answered, between puffs of his cigarette: "It sounds like Lucifer."

"That's it! " said Elmer, gulping down a drink of the raw whisky. "It's that brute of a Great Dane— he's gone for somebody! Hark to that shout, 'Help!'"

"Yes," growled Harvey Darrell; "it seems as though Judex Esslin has been prying."

"What are you going to do?"

"I suppose," said Darrell, "I shall have to go down, after all, to let him out."

For now the turmoil was terrific with the shouts and yells, and rumbling and tumbling and shattering and clattering, and crashing and smashing and shivering and splintering from below; the mingled screams of the affrighted servants, the opening of doors and banging of doors.

Harvey Darrell, followed—at a distance—by the awakened maids and the ghastly, trembling Elmer Dring, made his way down the winding staircase towards the door of the room he termed his den, which now, from the sounds emanating from it, might have been a den of beasts.

"Help! help!" came a voice, the voice of Judex Esslin.

Then one yet louder crashing fall—and a moaning sound—after that a strange silence, somehow more appalling than the turmoil.

By this time Harvey Darrell, leaping the last half-dozen stairs at a bound, dashed into the room. "Lucifer! Lucifer! Hallo, there! Down, boy— down! down! Come off—to heel—Lucifer—to heel!"

He switched on the electric light—then recoiled with a groan of horror at the sight.

There in the one space cleared within the debris of wrecked furniture lay the man and the huge hound side by side, the fangs of the hound set in the man's throat, one of the man's hands gripping the massive collar, the other thrust within the fangs. And that told what had happened.

That Judex Esslin, in extremis, had plucked from his waistcoat pocket a tiny capsule he had reserved for himself—in the event of the worst coming to the worst.

Man and hound were dead. The man had died of , induced in part by terror. The hound had died of prussic acid.

And Harvey Darrell, spurning aside the body of the man, knelt by that of the hound, and between his set teeth, whispered: "Yes, I've lost Lucifer—and with Lucifer I know I've lost my luck."

His Jane had named the day—without any noticeable shyness.

"Elmer," she had said, "don't forget!—it's Friday, at twelve prompt."

"Friday always was my un—I mean lucky day," said Elmer, pacing by her side in the moonlight along the pain by the railway embankment—his own appointed trysting-place and hour—it was quiet there. "You've brought the document, Jane?"

"You seem to be more concerned about that than anything else," Jane observed. "I believe you'd have been just as glad if, instead of bringing it, I'd sent it."

"Gladder!—I mean gladder still when there won't be any bringing or sending—when we shall be always near each other."

"Just so," said Jane, mentally scheming not to let Elmer far or often out of sight.

"And when I asked my dearest Jane to meet me by moonlight alone, of course the most joyful anticipation was—her—her turning up; but, of course, business is business, and when it's combined with pleasure, why, it's good business. Let's just have a look at the will? "

"How d'you know I've got it?" inquired Miss Collins, coyly.

"You wouldn't be such a—I mean," he said, choking back his wrath and impatience, "you would not be so cruel, surely. I must have the will, my dear Jane."

"But why? " she asked. "It's safe enough with me."

"I want to do a deal with it. I've fixed a price."

"With her?" she asked, with jealous suspicion.

"No, no, not with her—with him—with Harvey Darrell."

"What! alter the way he's treated you—and me?

You've bargained with the man we hate?"

"The more one dislikes the party the better the bargain," laughed Elmer. "For instance, Jane, I couldn't drive a hard bargain with you at all."

"I'm not so sure," said Miss Collins, dubiously. "What's he going to give for it?"

"A matter of—five hundred," replied Elmer Dring, hesitatingly, and Jane answered with decision : "Then he don't have it—I'd rather burn it." "Stupid! that would suit him just as well. Five hundred down—and a trifle more when she's handed over to the police," he said, unable to be fair, even with his partner in fraud and villainy.

"That's better!" said Jane, mollified both by the increase and the prospect of Pansy going back. "Let me walk next the hedge."

For the path now ran close alongside the steep grassy bank that fell on to the line, and a black cloud billow had hidden the pale face of the moon.

"When's he going to part with the stuff?" she asked.

"When we part with the document."

"Well, then, bring him to me, and when he hands over the flimsies I'll hand over the will."

" You'd better leave it to me."

"That's as may be," responded Jane, enigmatically, and Elmer, pressing her arm tenderly, cooed: "Surely my Jane can trust her betrothed to hold her dowry—for that's what it will be."

"It depends on what's holding her betrothed," growled Jane. "Leave it till after Friday—or let me deal direct with him."

"Come, come, my dear, dear Jane! my only Jane —you will, won't you? Where's the paper—darling?"

His arms enfolded her. With the other hand he grabbed at her jacket-pocket—felt nothing there; at the pocket of her dress—not there.

"Jane, trust me, my dear, my pet, my darling. Ah!"

He felt the crackle of it within her bodice. Wheedling with his voice, pitting his man's strength against her woman's, he half-coaxed, half-wrested from the folds of her dress, then from her struggling hand the will, despite her protestations.

"No, no! not till I get the brass—let go—you brute! —you're hurting my knuckles. Oh, my wrist —you wretch!—give it back to me."

"No, no!" he said, soothingly. "Be quiet, Jane —I'll act fair and square—I swear I will!"

Back from afar came through the night the long scream of a railway locomotive's whistle.

"Give it back to me," she persisted, clinging tenaciously to his arm.

"Wait—wait—let me just look at it," he said, holding it out of her reach while he scanned it in the moonlight. "Yes! it's all right—it's the will—the will! Steady, Jane—now don't be absurd!"

And pushing her away he thrust it into the breastpocket of his coat, which he buttoned over it.

"You thief—you swindler! But you're not going to best me over this deal. I'll spoil your game, I swear! I'll put you away! "

Nearer, louder came that whistling scream and white lights yonder through the dark.

"I tell you if you play me false this deal I'll talk —I'll talk loud—and you know what I can say! " Yes, he was thinking of that—thinking, too, how heavily and tenaciously she clung to him, literally and metaphorically. They stood alone—above the line.

lie had the will now—Jane's dowry was in his bands. Joined to Jane for life—what a life I And if he jibbed, Jane meant speaking out—and she could say such a lot. Why, if Jane spoke out he couldn't be in greater peril even-"Give it me back!" she cried, putting all her strength in one spasmodic effort to tear apart his closely-buttoned coat—"you shall—you shall!"

And of a sudden he, too, put out all his strength —seized her wrists, her arms, at last her throat, throwing all his strength into the fierce struggle. "Elmer," she gurgled, "let go—let—let—ah!" But he beat back her screams with a rain of blows, swirled her to right and left, exhausting her. Then, as her struggles slackened and ceased, he clenched his hold and gripped savagely—till she ceased even to moan, and sank down in the darkness at his feet, just as—another three hundred yards away—the midnight express came gleaming and screeching with a shattering, clattering—there below.

Stooping, - he lifted her prostrate, silent form, swung it to and fro—flung it from him down the embankment—watched it a moment swirl over and over down into the dark—then he turned away.

"Time to be going," he muttered, panting hard after his exertions.

"Bide a wee! " came a voice.

Elmer Dring started with a gasp of terror.

Up sailed the moon from out the billowy, black bank of cloud, and there, face to face, stood in his path his arch enemy!

"Darrell!" he whispered, uneasily, "what brings you here? "

"I came to listen and to watch. I've heard and seen more than I expected."

"You've seen?"

"Enough to hang you!"

"But you'd have to prove your words. I should have something, too, to say. And who could swear whose hand—yours or mine—it was? I should have a lot to say:—on lots of points. There is. no one by to contradict my story or prove yours."

"Just so. There's no one by—that's why, on second thoughts, I won't leave you to the hangman —I'll do his work myself! "

And with a tigerish bound the young man threw himself upon the old man.

But Elmer Dring was tough as well as old. They fought and struggled long and desperately there in the narrow path beside the hedge, and along the bank that ran down to the line. Hate gave Elmer strength; once, indeed, he freed himself from the hold of those leathery-sinewed arms and turned to fly. But with another panther spring his enemy was on him again—the two forms panting, gasping, writhed and twisted.

But neither raised any sound, save those of strenuous deadly strife. Had help been near, neither would have cared or dared to invoke it.

At last Elmer's knees gave way, and he fell beneath the other, who, crouching, worked his knees up on to his breast; then, grasping with hands the burly neck, interlaced his fingers upon it.

Now Elmer gasped for breath—and—mercy.

"I'm done! Don't kill me! Why not go shares? " he gurgled.

"No! " fiercely grated Harvey Darrell. "No division—I mean to scoop the pool!"

Loosening the grip of one strong, sinewy hand, he dived it into the breastfold of his coat; then withdrew it clutching a glittering something that Elmer recognised with a despairing groan. He meant with the snake-handled dagger to end his work.

A vengeful stroke, and it vras all but done. Elmer had ceased to struggle—even to groan. Cain's measure had been meted out to Cain.

Then suddenly over the hedge, out of the dark, two—three forms leaped. They threw themselves on Harvey Darrell, dragged him off his victim, and secured the weltering weapon; flashing fierce, white, dazzling lights full in his eyes.

One man, bending over Elmer Bring, shouted: "Hold your man hard; it seems to me we're just too late! " Then, to another hurrying to the scene: "Is this your man, sir? "

"Yes," answered Wickham Manners. "Heavens! the man's dying! What does it mean? "

"It means," said Austen Lisle, who had arrived along with him, "that revenge and hate have overtaken him ahead of Justice. This man who has mauled him almost, if not quite, to death is Harvey Darrell."' Manners scanned the face within the focus of the bull's-eye—to start violently and exclaim: "Darrell may be one of his aliases, but I know him best, and I've been searching for him, by the name of Andrew Valliston. It seems this web of crime is interwoven with another web."

"And there's another thread," exclaimed one of the men from Scotland Yard, who out of curiosity had set his bull's-eye flash roving round.

And down the bank, within its quivering focus, they saw another form all in a heap, a woman's— checked in its downward flight by the telegraph wires beside the line.

"It's Jane Collins," gasped Austen Lisle, in awe, when they brought her up the bank. "And she, too, is dead!"

"Not yet," came in fitful gasps. "I—I won't die till I've said my say—and got level with that traitor there."

"Aggravating to the last!" panted Elmer Dring.

"All right, Jane—it doesn't matter v/hat you say new. I'm going."

To the signal-box, where they carried him and Jane and dragged the man called Harvey Darrell, they brought from the station a passenger who happened to be a doctor, and, still more conveniently, also a magistrate. It was only in the latter capacity he could be of use so far as concerned Elmer, whose depositions he took—Jane punctuating the gasped-out murder-charge with groans of satisfaction.

"You've got your dues at last, Elmer," she said. "I don't care now if it snows. I'd have liked my evidence to have hanged you, but the other thief has tricked me of even my revenge."

"I shall trick you of more of it before I go," returned Elmer. "Listen, all of you! It was I— not Pansy Armadale—killed Gideon Abbs—with that very poniard. Jane gave it me to sell for her— the old man meant screwing his money out of me— I came back in the dark and did him to death. She knows that! " and he pointed to the woman he had tried to murder. "I buried the weapon in the garden at Homecroft. He knows that! " and he pointed to his murderer.

The man holding his pulse with a doctor's hand, with a magistrate's wrote his confession down.

"Dring," said Austen Lisle, "if you can do little good now, you've undone some of your evil work."

"Yes," howled Jane, "I'd sooner he'd have settled me outright than told that. Elmer, Elmer!

before you go—say good-bye to me—say it wasn't all a lie—that you—loved me—if only once upon a time—if ever such a little! "

But his last words had exhausted all his strength —a grey change was coming over the flabbier than ever features.

' "The—wa—ges—of sin—is death! " he gasped, faintly, slowly—"I'm paid."

Covered with a tarpaulin, they bore him in one ambulance, Jane in another, to the hospital. Then out into the night they led Andrew Valliston, handcuffed.

Not that he resisted.

"The game's up! I'll go quietly," he snarled.' "I've often thought of your words, Mr. Wickham Manners, that I was a bit too smart. I couldn't stand the idea of the old hunk's money lying rusting. I'd got the pedigree at my fingers' ends, and, once on the other side, I soon faked the certificates. Which way, sergeant? Over the bridge? All right —you needn't grip my arms so tightly; I shan't give any trouble."

As he went up the bridge slope, quite docilely, he raised his voice—for the down-train was rushing in below, throbbing and clattering.

"Hold him! " shouted Lisle.

But the prisoner had swerved, stooped, tripped up one captor, wrenched himself free of another. Austen Lisle, with a spring, seized his coat. In an instant he had wriggled and slipped out of it, as a snake sloughs its skin.

A shout!--a leap!-—he was over the parapet! Leaning over it, aghast, they looked down after him.

But the down-express sent up its volume of smoke and smother—hiding everything—which was just as well, for it would not have been good to see.

Wickham Manners told the judge—who told the Horne Secretary; and Pansy Armadale, in lieu of further durance during his Majesty's pleasure, received his gracious pardon for what she had never done.

Jane Collins, bereft of not only Elmer, whom in her way she had loved, but of the reflection that the martyrdom of Pansy, whom she did not love, was to cease, declared that there was nothing left to live for, and followed her betrothed to the grave instead of to the registry—or the dock.

There was balm in Gilead! Cecilia Wickham Manners, with sweet, womanly soothing, calmed and comforted Pansy, while Jack and Austen Lisle moved heaven and earth, including the Bench and the Cabinet, to have justice rendered her. Then mere was peaceful, restful Homecraft to retire to, with Nannie Nepean's tears of joy, soft and comforting as summer rain; with Job Wattles setting down his barrow-load of cuttings at' every dozen yards to exclaim, "Lardy! Miss Pansy, summer's come at last, as us knowed it would come, all along —didn't us, Bingo?"

And the brindled bulldog whimpered confirmation as he jumped up again to lick the gentle lily hand.

Then ever and anon there was Austen Lisle coming down from town with reports from Wickham Manners, to whose hands Pansy had committed her affairs—the proving of the will, the setting things in order, the sale of the Lone House. For nothing would have induced Pansy again to dwell there.

There was much to be remembered, much to be forgotten.

Foremost amongst the things to be forgotten, Austen pleaded that he had held that brief based, though he knew it not, on fraud, perjury, and conspiracy. And Pansy answered, with her eyes as well as her voice, that it would be easy to forget all that, with so much to remember that was kind, true, good and tender.

And later, when the pleasant country air had brought the bloom of Homecroft's roses back to her cheeks, and months of security and calm had soothed the sorely-tried and wounded heart of her, Austen asked of Pansy Armadale another question. Would she let him devote his life to making her bright and joyous—would she merge her life into his?

Dear Nannie Nepean said that it was a shame to take her darling again av/ay from her. Why couldn't her boy and girl make their courting longer—so that, instead of losing one, she could have the twain near her. He took the kind, sweet face, framed in the silver hair, in both his hands, and replied: "No, no! You will not get rid of us so easily; Nannie dear. We mean to make our home as close to yours as can be—so that when we are not at your place you shall be at ours."

And they both kissed her.

Cecilia Wickham Manners, at whose house the breakfast was held, declared that, quiet as the wedding was, it was a pretty one—that it couldn't be otherwise, with so sweet a bride.

Then Austen Lisle took his bride away on a far honeymoon, over land and sea, and land again, that in bright and ever-changing scenes and climes, aided by his loving, sheltering care, she might , live down the ordeal of anguish, the dark, sad days for ever gone, and the dread chain that, link by link, was forged and interlinked—happily only to be, in Heaven's good time, broken----"LINK BY LINK."