Address to the Nation on the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant

Delivered 10 September 2014

My fellow Americans, tonight I want to speak to you about what the United States will do with
our friends and allies to degrade and ultimately destroy the terrorist group known as ISIL.
As Commander-in-Chief, my highest priority is the security of the American people. Over the
last several years, we have consistently taken the fight to terrorists who threaten our
country. We took out Osama bin Laden and much of al Qaeda's leadership in Afghanistan and
Pakistan. We've targeted al Qaeda's affiliate in Yemen, and recently eliminated the top
commander of its affiliate in Somalia. We've done so while bringing more than 140,000
American troops home from Iraq, and drawing down our forces in Afghanistan, where our
combat mission will end later this year. Thanks to our military and counterterrorism
professionals, America is safer.
Still, we continue to face a terrorist threat. We can't erase every trace of evil from the world,
and small groups of killers have the capacity to do great harm. That was the case before
9/11, and that remains true today. And that's why we must remain vigilant as threats
emerge. At this moment, the greatest threats come from the Middle East and North Africa,
where radical groups exploit grievances for their own gain. And one of those groups is ISIL -which calls itself the "Islamic State."
Now let's make two things clear: ISIL is not "Islamic." No religion condones the killing of
innocents. And the vast majority of ISIL's victims have been Muslim. And ISIL is certainly
not a state. It was formerly al Qaeda's affiliate in Iraq, and has taken advantage of sectarian
strife and Syria's civil war to gain territory on both sides of the Iraq-Syrian border.
It is recognized by no government, nor by the people it subjugates. ISIL is a terrorist
organization, pure and simple. And it has no vision other than the slaughter of all who stand
in its way.
In a region that has known so much bloodshed, these terrorists are unique in their brutality.
They execute captured prisoners. They kill children. They enslave, rape, and force women
into marriage. They threatened a religious minority with genocide. And in acts of barbarism,
they took the lives of two American journalists -- Jim Foley and Steven Sotloff.
So ISIL poses a threat to the people of Iraq and Syria, and the broader Middle East -including American citizens, personnel and facilities. If left unchecked, these terrorists could
pose a growing threat beyond that region, including to the United States. While we have not
yet detected specific plotting against our homeland, ISIL leaders have threatened America and
our allies. Our Intelligence Community believes that thousands of foreigners -– including
Europeans and some Americans –- have joined them in Syria and Iraq. Trained and battlehardened, these fighters could try to return to their home countries and carry out deadly
attacks.
I know many Americans are concerned about these threats. Tonight, I want you to know that
the United States of America is meeting them with strength and resolve. Last month, I
ordered our military to take targeted action against ISIL to stop its advances. Since then,
we've conducted more than 150 successful airstrikes in Iraq. These strikes have protected
American personnel and facilities, killed ISIL fighters, destroyed weapons, and given space for
Iraqi and Kurdish forces to reclaim key territory. These strikes have also helped save the lives
of thousands of innocent men, women and children.
But this is not our fight alone. American power can make a decisive difference, but we cannot
do for Iraqis what they must do for themselves, nor can we take the place of Arab partners in
securing their region. And that's why I've insisted that additional U.S. action depended upon
Iraqis forming an inclusive government, which they have now done in recent days. So
tonight, with a new Iraqi government in place, and following consultations with allies abroad
and Congress at home, I can announce that America will lead a broad coalition to roll back
this terrorist threat.
Our objective is clear: We will degrade, and ultimately destroy, ISIL through a comprehensive
and sustained counterterrorism strategy.
First, we will conduct a systematic campaign of airstrikes against these terrorists. Working
with the Iraqi government, we will expand our efforts beyond protecting our own people and
humanitarian missions, so that we're hitting ISIL targets as Iraqi forces go on offense.
Moreover, I have made it clear that we will hunt down terrorists who threaten our country,
wherever they are. That means I will not hesitate to take action against ISIL in Syria, as well
as Iraq. This is a core principle of my presidency: If you threaten America, you will find no
safe haven.
Second, we will increase our support to forces fighting these terrorists on the ground. In
June, I deployed several hundred American servicemembers to Iraq to assess how we can
best support Iraqi security forces. Now that those teams have completed their work –- and
Iraq has formed a government –- we will send an additional 475 servicemembers to Iraq. As
I have said before, these American forces will not have a combat mission –- we will not get
dragged into another ground war in Iraq. But they are needed to support Iraqi and Kurdish
forces with training, intelligence and equipment. We'll also support Iraq's efforts to stand up
National Guard Units to help Sunni communities secure their own freedom from ISIL's control.
Across the border, in Syria, we have ramped up our military assistance to the Syrian
opposition. Tonight, I call on Congress again to give us additional authorities and resources to
train and equip these fighters. In the fight against ISIL, we cannot rely on an Assad regime
that terrorizes its own people -- a regime that will never regain the legitimacy it has lost.
Instead, we must strengthen the opposition as the best counterweight to extremists like ISIL,
while pursuing the political solution necessary to solve Syria's crisis once and for all.
Third, we will continue to draw on our substantial counterterrorism capabilities to prevent ISIL
attacks. Working with our partners, we will redouble our efforts to cut off its funding; improve
our intelligence; strengthen our defenses; counter its warped ideology; and stem the flow of
foreign fighters into and out of the Middle East. And in two weeks, I will chair a meeting of
the U.N. Security Council to further mobilize the international community around this effort.
Fourth, we will continue to provide humanitarian assistance to innocent civilians who have
been displaced by this terrorist organization. This includes Sunni and Shia Muslims who are at
grave risk, as well as tens of thousands of Christians and other religious minorities. We
cannot allow these communities to be driven from their ancient homelands.
So this is our strategy. And in each of these four parts of our strategy, America will be joined
by a broad coalition of partners. Already, allies are flying planes with us over Iraq; sending
arms and assistance to Iraqi security forces and the Syrian opposition; sharing intelligence;
and providing billions of dollars in humanitarian aid. Secretary Kerry was in Iraq today
meeting with the new government and supporting their efforts to promote unity. And in the
coming days he will travel across the Middle East and Europe to enlist more partners in this
fight, especially Arab nations who can help mobilize Sunni communities in Iraq and Syria, to
drive these terrorists from their lands. This is American leadership at its best: We stand with
people who fight for their own freedom, and we rally other nations on behalf of our common
security and common humanity.
My Administration has also secured bipartisan support for this approach here at home. I have
the authority to address the threat from ISIL, but I believe we are strongest as a nation when
the President and Congress work together. So I welcome congressional support for this effort
in order to show the world that Americans are united in confronting this danger.
Now, it will take time to eradicate a cancer like ISIL. And any time we take military action,
there are risks involved –- especially to the servicemen and women who carry out these
missions. But I want the American people to understand how this effort will be different from
the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. It will not involve American combat troops fighting on
foreign soil. This counterterrorism campaign will be waged through a steady, relentless effort
to take out ISIL wherever they exist, using our air power and our support for partner forces
on the ground.
This strategy of taking out terrorists who threaten us, while supporting partners on the front
lines, is one that we have successfully pursued in Yemen and Somalia for years. And it is
consistent with the approach I outlined earlier this year: to use force against anyone who
threatens America's core interests, but to mobilize partners wherever possible to address
broader challenges to international order.
My fellow Americans, we live in a time of great change. Tomorrow marks 13 years since our
country was attacked. Next week marks six years since our economy suffered its worst
setback since the Great Depression. Yet despite these shocks, through the pain we have felt
and the grueling work required to bounce back, America is better positioned today to seize the
future than any other nation on Earth.
Our technology companies and universities are unmatched. Our manufacturing and auto
industries are thriving. Energy independence is closer than it's been in decades. For all the
work that remains, our businesses are in the longest uninterrupted stretch of job creation in
our history. Despite all the divisions and discord within our democracy, I see the grit and
determination and common goodness of the American people every single day –- and that
makes me more confident than ever about our country's future.
Abroad, American leadership is the one constant in an uncertain world. It is America that has
the capacity and the will to mobilize the world against terrorists. It is America that has rallied
the world against Russian aggression, and in support of the Ukrainian peoples' right to
determine their own destiny. It is America –- our scientists, our doctors, our know-how –that can help contain and cure the outbreak of Ebola. It is America that helped remove and
destroy Syria's declared chemical weapons so that they can't pose a threat to the Syrian
people or the world again. And it is America that is helping Muslim communities around the
world not just in the fight against terrorism, but in the fight for opportunity, and tolerance,
and a more hopeful future.
America, our endless blessings bestow an enduring burden. But as Americans, we welcome
our responsibility to lead. From Europe to Asia, from the far reaches of Africa to war-torn
capitals of the Middle East, we stand for freedom, for justice, for dignity. These are values
that have guided our nation since its founding.
Tonight, I ask for your support in carrying that leadership forward. I do so as a Commanderin-Chief who could not be prouder of our men and women in uniform –- pilots who bravely fly
in the face of danger above the Middle East, and servicemembers who support our partners on
the ground.
When we helped prevent the massacre of civilians trapped on a distant mountain, here's what
one of them said: "We owe our American friends our lives. Our children will always
remember that there was someone who felt our struggle and made a long journey to protect
innocent people."
That is the difference we make in the world. And our own safety, our own security, depends
upon our willingness to do what it takes to defend this nation and uphold the values that we
stand for –- timeless ideals that will endure long after those who offer only hate and
destruction have been vanquished from the Earth.
May God bless our troops, and may God bless the United States of America.