Rose Garden Address on Benghazi Attacks
Delivered 12 September 2012, White House, Washington, D.C.


Good morning. Every day, all across the world, American diplomats and civilians work
tirelessly to advance the interests and values of our nation. Often, they are away from their
families. Sometimes, they brave great danger.
Yesterday, four of these extraordinary Americans were killed in an attack on our diplomatic
post in Benghazi. Among those killed was our Ambassador, Chris Stevens, as well as Foreign
Service Officer Sean Smith. We are still notifying the families of the others who were killed.
And today, the American people stand united in holding the families of the four Americans in
our thoughts and in our prayers.
The United States condemns in the strongest terms this outrageous and shocking attack.
We're working with the government of Libya to secure our diplomats. I've also directed my
administration to increase our security at diplomatic posts around the world. And make no
mistake, we will work with the Libyan government to bring to justice the killers who attacked
our people.


Since our founding, the United States has been a nation that respects all faiths. We reject all
efforts to denigrate the religious beliefs of others. But there is absolutely no justification to
this type of senseless violence. None. The world must stand together to unequivocally reject
these brutal acts.
Already, many Libyans have joined us in doing so, and this attack will not break the bonds
between the United States and Libya. Libyan security personnel fought back against the
attackers alongside Americans. Libyans helped some of our diplomats find safety, and they
carried Ambassador Stevens’s body to the hospital, where we tragically learned that he had
died.
It's especially tragic that Chris Stevens died in Benghazi because it is a city that he helped to
save. At the height of the Libyan revolution, Chris led our diplomatic post in Benghazi. With
characteristic skill, courage, and resolve, he built partnerships with Libyan revolutionaries, and
helped them as they planned to build a new Libya. When the Qaddafi regime came to an end,
Chris was there to serve as our ambassador to the new Libya, and he worked tirelessly to
support this young democracy, and I think both Secretary Clinton and I relied deeply on his
knowledge of the situation on the ground there. He was a role model to all who worked with
him and to the young diplomats who aspire to walk in his footsteps.
Along with his colleagues, Chris died in a country that is still striving to emerge from the
recent experience of war. Today, the loss of these four Americans is fresh, but our memories
of them linger on. I have no doubt that their legacy will live on through the work that they
did far from our shores and in the hearts of those who love them back home.
Of course, yesterday was already a painful day for our nation as we marked the solemn
memory of the 9/11 attacks. We mourned with the families who were lost on that day. I
visited the graves of troops who made the ultimate sacrifice in Iraq and Afghanistan at the
hallowed grounds of Arlington Cemetery, and had the opportunity to say thank you and visit
some of our wounded warriors at Walter Reed. And then last night, we learned the news of
this attack in Benghazi.

As Americans, let us never, ever forget that our freedom is only sustained because there are
people who are willing to fight for it, to stand up for it, and in some cases, lay down their lives
for it. Our country is only as strong as the character of our people and the service of those
both civilian and military who represent us around the globe.
No acts of terror will ever shake the resolve of this great nation, alter that character, or
eclipse the light of the values that we stand for. Today we mourn four more Americans who
represent the very best of the United States of America. We will not waver in our
commitment to see that justice is done for this terrible act. And make no mistake, justice will
be done.
But we also know that the lives these Americans led stand in stark contrast to those of their
attackers. These four Americans stood up for freedom and human dignity. They should give
every American great pride in the country that they served, and the hope that our flag
represents to people around the globe who also yearn to live in freedom and with dignity.
We grieve with their families, but let us carry on their memory, and let us continue their work
of seeking a stronger America and a better world for all of our children.
Thank you. May God bless the memory of those we lost and may God bless the United States
of America.
