Roberts, Walter A. Mind Reader (The)   [ 1911 ]
  
Mind Reader (The) Roberts, Walter A. 1911 fiction
My entanglement in the Daniel Buwalda affair, an amazing conspiracy which came close to turning the world topsy-turvy, was brought about by my interest in psychic phenomena. I earn my living is a clerk in a Wall Street broker's office. My employers regard me as a quiet fellow, who makes few mistakes in figures and who appreciates the luxury of working only from ten to four. To the majority of my friends, I am sociable and fond of sports. I dance well, play tennis and am always willing to join a boating party in summer. Horse racing and an occasional prize fight appeal to me.

A limited circle of intimates, however, know me as in amateur spiritualist. I use the term because I can think of no more comprehensive one. After doubting the point for several years, I do, in fact, believe that the souls of human beings retain their identities when the flesh dies, and that in favorable circumstances they can communicate with the living. But I reject the spiritual origin of most of the things that occur at seances, and I am depressed by the credulity of those who rely upon the mediums. The general run of phenomena can be ascribed, in my opinion, to mind reading and to other natural causes.

I am not a profound occultist, as is my brother Owen, who was an even more important factor than I in the Buwalda affair. Yet I am something more than an agnostic investigator. So let it stand that I am a spiritualist.

My close contact with the practice of the cult insures my hearing of any new medium who seems to have!

unusual power. The tribe is fond of publicity—as a tribe. But there are certain individuals who keep their names out of the newspapers, and who restrict the attendance at their seances to personal followers and friends of the latter. These are the most interesting mediums, because they have not commercialized themselves too crudely and because the exclusive character of their meetings is apt to create favorable psychic conditions.

When I was told about Daniel Buwalda, I thought I was merely being put on the track of an odd sensitive. Events proved it to be my introduction to an adventure without parallel in the history of the subject.

The man gave demonstrations, it seemed, at a private house on Baltic Street, Brooklyn, once a week.

He went in for table tipping, automatic writing and all the stock devices, but was especially strong on mind reading. He did not pose as a fortune teller. He lectured in a high-flown vein of mysticism, and exhibited his gifts. The admission fee was five dollars, so he evidently had a reputation in his own circle. I decided to look him over, and to that end obtained a card through a friend of mine, John Lang, who had been to several of Buwalda's seances.

Baltic Street is a somewhat run-down thoroughfare to the south of the Brooklyn Heights residential section. The house I sought stood near Clinton Street.

It was of brick, dingy-looking on the outside, with steps that had begun to scale away under the treading of many feet. Once beyond the vestibule, however, I saw evidences of its having been modernized. The carpet in the hall was of good quality. The heavy doors and the balustrade were varnished with a mahogany finish.

A mouse-like young woman sat at a table at the foot of the stairs. She examined my card of introduction, entered the facts about me in a book and accepted my five dollars. She then pointed to the heavy velvet draperies which veiled the way to the front parlor. I pushed them aside and found myself in the creepy, funereal sort of room that long experience had led me to identify with semi-public seances. Front and back parlors had been thrown into one. At the far end was a raised platform, on which stood a table, a wooden screen, a small upright piano and three chairs. The table bore various stock properties, such as a human skull, a tambourine, pencils and papers, packs of cards and so forth.

Flimsy camp meeting chairs were arranged in rows all the way from the platform down to the windows opening on the street. The walls were hung with dark purple cloth, the monotony of which there were no pictures to break.

I was disappointed by the traditional striving for mere weirdness. Surely an adept mystic would have | scorned to imitate lesser practitioners, I thought. But I was interested in the audience, which consisted of i seventeen persons, well dressed and seemingly from the higher walks of society. They were grouped in the chairs nearest the platform. I joined them there, obtaining a seat at the left end of the first row. Next to me was a beautiful woman of that dark and placid type which suggests the Orient to Americans. Her abundant black hair was coiled above a face of which the features were all well formed, but were weakened by a certain plumpness and softness in detail. Her chin was too round, her lips too full and red, her eyes too moist. Her olive skin had that delicacy which comes from an avoidance of the outdoors. She cuddled luxuriously like a cat in the folds of a rich fur coat she was loath to remove even in that warm room. Her fine brown hands with their pink nails lay limply crossed in her lap. She might have been thirty years old, but seemed younger because of the calm amiability of her temperament.

I fell to wondering what this harem woman was doing in a company that was tense and restless as it waited for the medium. The other women had keener faces, though none was as lovely as she was.

The men had the stamp of fanaticism upon their narrow foreheads and tight mouths. It is a fact that— scientific investigators apart—the male habitues of seances tend to treat their fad as a religion, while women care more for its fortune-telling aspects.

Here and there I heard the whispered name of Buwalda. The odd foreign syllables fell from some lips with a note of awe, from others with a passionate admiration. My own curiosity began to grow. I was conscious of a thrill not unlike the shuddering excitement with which, as a boy, I had sat in at my first table tipping party.

The medium walked on to the platform at last, unannounced, by way of a side door. He was a lean, blond man of strange appearance. He had an admirably developed brow, but this was neutralized by the lower part of his face, which was over-long and triangular in shape. Especially in profile, his jaw was a triangle, flat-surfaced, running down to an offensively pointed chin, and gashed on one side by a cruel mouth.

He would have done well to wear a beard. His hair was too long about the ears. His eyes were the most noncommittal disks of blue glass I had ever seen in a human countenance.

Seating himself carelessly and resting his elbows on the table, Buwalda balanced his chin on his locked hands. He commenced to speak without any salutation to the audience.

"The experiments with the supernatural which we have made in this house should be regarded humbly j as exercises in the training of our psychic selves,"

he said. "I know no more than you do why I have been able to get so closely en rapport with the members I of the circle. I am aware only that the results have!

been stupendous. With each stage in the surrender j of your minds to mine, I have gained in power and yet you have not been losers. There is no such thing as superiority as between the active and the passive principle. They supplement one another. I am the bow of the violin; you are the many strings."

He continued in this vein for nearly half an hour, saying nothing that was really profound, but obviously!

tightening his hold upon his disciples. I rated him as a dangerous charlatan, because his aim was to dominate them personally and the motive behind that course is nearly always a mercenary one. However, his insistence—many times repeated—that they must accompany him into ever more difficult experiments, held me interested. I wondered what on earth he could show them in the way of a new exercise that evening.

When Buwalda had finished his lecture, he arose and paced moodily about the platform. Several times he covered his eyes with his hand, as if to steady himself for a desperate effort.

"Let us begin with something easy," he compromised. "It will serve to prepare our mood."

He took a pack of cards and stepped down to where a woman was seated on the aisle in the row behind me. By turning about slightly, I could watch all that passed. Buwalda spread out the cards fanwise, their backs toward him.

"Choose one, Madam," he ordered. "Do not name it aloud, but bear it clearly in your mind. Do you think you can do that without forgetting?"

She nodded. "I have chosen a card."

"Now take the whole pack out of my hands and shuffle it."

As she obeyed, the medium turned and walked back to the platform. He seemed deliberately to be holding his arms far from his body. They hung like j the curved wings of a raven. "Was your card a red one?" he asked quizzically.

"Why—why no, Master," the woman stammered.

"It was a spade, perhaps?"

"N-no."

"Is it a picture card that I see? Tell me, did you select a king?"

"I am afraid not," she answered shamefacedly, and as if saddened by his failure.

"Then I shall stop guessing. Please name the card for us."

"It was the ten of clubs."

Buwalda threw his arms wide and raised them in a gesture of benediction. "I ask you to note what a perfect little test of the power of mind over mind this has been," he cried to the whole audience. "I knew that our friend had not chosen a red card, nor a king, nor a picture card of any kind. My questions were merely to try her memory. For the best of reasons, I knew that it was the ten of clubs, which has been in my pocket from the beginning."

He slipped his hand into his right trousers pocket and produced the ten of clubs.

"I required our friend to name it before I showed it to you," he went on. "It was then named aloud for dthe first time, which disposes of the fear that a mechanical trick might have been performed. As a matter of fact, when she glanced at the pack the ten of clubs was not there. Telepathically, I made her see it, compelled her to choose it. I challenge any one to find a ten of clubs among the cards which she still holds."

Three members of the audience, including myself, looked through the deck and announced that Buwalda was right. No one gasped. The disciples treated the manifestation as a predestined triumph. They appeared to have witnessed many others like it.

I found it curious enough. If there had been sleight of hand, I had failed to detect it. And as the theory of collusion would have made the whole seance pointless, I preferred for the time being to assume that there had been no collusion.

"We shall now progress to an operation of the greatest delicacy," chanted Buwalda. "Be not deluded because the thing I am about to demonstrate does not seem to rise above the physical plane. It is what in the Dark Ages would have been called magic. All such power is of spiritual origin and places us in contact with the immaterial kingdom."

He nodded in my direction. I thought he was looking at me, but the beautiful dark woman at my side leaned forward expectantly and I knew the call was for her.

"Coralie, will you please come to the platform. I need you to help me in this test of occult forces," he said.

She drew her arms indolently from the sleeves of her fur coat, and as she stood up I saw for the first time how voluptuous were the curves of her body. She walked with the slow grace of a sultaness, too sure of herself to care about competing with the women who regard animation as a source of charm. And she was as stupid-looking, with all her comeliness, as the queen of an Eastern harem inevitably must be. The contrast between her and Daniel Buwalda was amazing. Her dusky tranquillity threw into sharp relief his angular blondness, his bridled neuroticism. Obviously, she was his slave. Her eyes said so in their lazy way. But her lips did not quiver when she stood in front of him. The other feminine devotees stared at her with a bitter and unconcealed envy.

Buwalda moved tensely to the screen I had already noted as one of his props. He turned it about and rapped upon it in different places with his knuckles.

We could see that it was made of three wooden panels, the spaces between which were about a quarter of an inch wide. He used a piece of chalk to make random marks on both sides of it. Then he placed it endwise to the audience, so that it divided the platform into two sections.

"Please step to the other side of the screen, Coralie,"

he said, almost in a whisper.

The woman obeyed him.

"Be ready to receive whatever I may give you."

He closed his eyes, and fumbled on top of the table.

Encountering the tambourine, he clutched it with a convulsive gesture and apparently passed it clear through the middle panel of the screen. His hand stopped at the wooden surface on his side, but the tambourine, which was some eight inches in diameter, had gone through. Coralie took it from him as a matter of course. She gave it a shake, so that its foolish little bells tinkled, and then laid it on a chair.

Solemnly, Buwalda manipulated the screen to show us that the wood had not been broken, or the chalk marks disturbed.

This demonstration left me absolutely stunned. I am familiar with most of the tricks whereby stage magicians create illusions apparently as marvelous as the one described. Even with the scanty equipment on Buwalda's platform, I had no doubt that a Houdini or a Thurston could have fooled the eye into believing that one solid piece of matter had been projected bodily through another without leaving a trace.

But none of my experiences with those master showmen had given me reason to think that they could have caused the mental turmoil I had just undergone.

The moment the tambourine had touched the screen, I had felt a jolt and a rending sensation in my; brain. Almost simultaneously, a series of disconnected pictures shaped themselves before my interior vision with a clarity at least as definite as that of scenes in a dream. The nearest I can come to describing what happened is to say that the pictures spun across my mind like bits snipped out of a movie reel.

I saw a library in a rich home, empty at first, then with the figure of a tall man standing just inside the door, his back towards me. The next instant, the scene changed to the exterior of a town house, ornate and old-fashioned, a sort of transplanted French chateau. The tall man started to run down the steps as the picture faded. I then saw a flash of the dressing table in a woman's boudoir, which merged fantastically into a corner of an empty subway car. A dark feminine head loomed dimly, as if seen in a room where there was no light. I could not make out the features before this vision, too, passed on.

The inexplicable phenomena lasted no longer than the time it took for the tambourine to travel from Buwalda's hands into those of the woman he had addressed as Coralie. I stated above that my brain felt as if it had been rended, but the experience was not accompanied by pain. It was an opening and shutting of some purely mental mechanism, and yet the imprcssion was that of having been given a glimpse of actual scenes in the world outside myself, rather than!

of having used my imagination with peculiar vividness.

I was careful not to betray my bewilderment. But I felt weak as I slumped in my chair. I wondered whether the other members of the audience had been through the same adventure. Their faces were tranquil.

Only Buwalda seemed slightly disturbed about something. His glassy blue eyes roved formidably from person to person, and his hands twitched.

"We'll repeat the experiment," he said abruptly.

He snatched up the tambourine, and again passed it through the screen to Coralie. The act was performed more swiftly than it had been the first time.

Again I saw pictures—two of them, in that brief spell.

I saw the library, occupied now by three unrecognizable people. And once more there was a vision of the man running down the steps of the pretentious mansion.

"My friends, you have witnessed a complete defiance of the laws that hitherto have governed matter,"

declared Buwalda. "A new law has been set up by our psychic selves, by the pure spiritual flame that is in Coralie Griffin, in you of the circle, in me. Our combined faith made possible the marvel you have just seen. Soon it will be equally feasible for one of our mortal bodies to walk unscathed through a rock--------"

While he was speaking, the dark woman, Coralie, came rustling down from the platform. She sat in her old place beside me, her calm unruffled, her lips still parted in a soft, sensuous smile. I paid no further attention to her, a negligence I was later to regret. My eyes and ears were all for Daniel Buwalda. I strove to piece a meaning out of his tags of pseudo-scientific rhetoric. I watched intently while he performed for nearly an hour with a tipping table that spelled out messages from the departed with no greater originality than had been manifested at my own private seances.

I was on the lookout for some parallel to the tambourine incident, but there was none.

It never entered my head that I could address this man after the meeting, could claim professional brotherhood, so to speak, and discuss our respective powers. His sinister personality forbade it.

When at about midnight he dismissed the gathering, I arose silently and left with the rest.

I walked away from Baltic Street more puzzled than I had ever been since my debut as a spiritualist five years before. The medium, Buwalda, was fumbling in some unexplored region of psychic activity; of that I felt sure. How definite a goal he had in view was another question again. I determined not to miss a single one of his meetings until I had discovered his trend at least. If I could isolate from its trimmings of hokum the method that had caused me to see motion pictures in my waking brain, I wanted to try it out myself on other people.

The keen winter air refreshed me and turned my thoughts into normal channels. It was a February night, dry and cold. A powdery snow had fallen, and a gusty breeze was now driving it along in eddies like smoke upon the sidewalk. I hurried north to take the subway at Borough Hall, but at Atlantic Avenue an Armenian coffee house lured me and I stopped for refreshments. The New Yorker who does not know about Armenian coffee and pastry shops has missed one of the pleasures of life in his imperial city. In these seductive places, there are counters loaded down with cakes made with honey instead of sugar. Strange, sweetmeats and candies stuffed with almonds, dates and currants, and dusted with fragments of green pistachio, fairly clamor to be eaten without discretion.

The coffee served in little cups resembles a cordial, so strong is it and so heavily sweetened. It is coffee after the Turkish recipe, and the Armenians who for so long were slaves of the Turks have adopted it as their own.

I took a corner table, ordered a flaky confection called pahklava, and with cigarettes and coffee I proceeded to dally for a while. Asiatics with swarthy skins and jet black hair sat all around me. There were Syrians and a few Persians, as well as Armenians. I liked to feel I could distinguish the racial types, and in the majority of cases I think I was correct. The men were more familiar to me than the women, who were few in number. Even in New York, Asiatic women are apt to be timid about appearing in public. However, a handsome wife about thirty years old sat with her husband at the next table, and across the room a patriarchal fellow with a drooping white mustache was smiling benignantly upon four young girls I took to be his granddaughters.

How exotic these women were, how lovely in their sleepy brunette fashion! I said to myself. And suddenly it struck me that a query which had been prodding at my subconscious mind had now been answered.

I had been wondering about the nationality of Coralie Griffin, of the seance on Baltic Street. In spite of her American name, which after all might have been acquired by marriage, that dark beauty was Armenian —possibly Syrian—or I missed a bet. Curious that she should have been assisting in the practice of a Western version of the black arts! I fell to musing upon how Buwalda had contrived to awake her interest, to draw her into his circle. Her presence there added a tang, I concluded, to the mystery I was so eager to explore.

But I did not spare a thought for the impulse that had led me to visit this Oriental restaurant and thus be inspired to guess at Coralie's origin. The reader will probably agree with me, as my story unfolds, that it was not wholly a coincidence. I have found that when I am engaged upon a psychic investigation, very few of the things I do can be classed as accidental.

I left the coffee house at one o'clock in the morning and sauntered along Court Street to the Borough Hall Square. I remember as clearly as if it were yesterday that I hesitated as to whether I should enter the old subway station at Joralemon and Court. I could have caught a train there for my home in the central section of Brooklyn. But I had a feeling, not justified by the facts, that I would be likelier to get a train quickly at that hour in the new station served by the West Side line from Manhattan. So I crossed the square to the corner of Myrtle Avenue. I dropped my nickel in the slot at the turnstile and descended two flights of stairs to the lower platform.

A small number of passengers were grouped at the center of the platform. There was no train in sight.

Made restless by the cold, I started to walk briskly to and fro. I continued to the forward end of the platform, and then retraced my steps. This I did several times. I found myself at the extreme rear end when finally a New Lots train pulled in, and it was the last car that I entered. Without glancing about me, I sat on one of the long side seats near the door and thought idly of a girl I had met the week before and whom I expected to see again the following evening. My first impression had been that I was the only person in the car. But a conviction that this was not so began to fasten itself upon me with an urgency I found strange.

I turned rather abruptly and saw that a man was slumped in a crosswise seat, half way down the car.

He had a big frame, and he was made to seem even bulkier than he was by reason of being enveloped in an overcoat of generous cut. The collar was turned up about his ears, the front flaps overlapped and were held loosely by one button, and the sleeves came down over his hands. The man wore a soft hat low on his forehead. His chin rested on his chest and was sunk out of sight. But his eyes, nose and mouth formed a stark, uncovered mask.

Never can I forget the throb of pity and surprise which stabbed through me. The man appeared to be desperately ill. His skin was of a greenish pallor. His nostrils were pinched. His eyes were unspeakably sad, bloodshot and fixed in their stare. I could tell at a glance that he was not drunk, or suffering from a spell of dyspeptic nausea. His trouble was profound. Yet he gave no sign of wanting aid. His huddled attitude, somehow, was stony in its indifference to the rest of the world.

I hesitated for a few minutes. The train stopped at Nevins Street and was off again without picking up additional passengers for our car. Then I could stand it no longer. I arose and joined the stranger, taking the cross seat opposite to him.

"Excuse me," I said, "it's no business of mine, but you look pretty ill, you know. Can I do anything to help you?"

He made no answer, and failed even to turn his head in my direction. His eyelids flickered faintly, that was all. The idea that he might be paralyzed occurred to me, but at that moment his knee swung in a tormented fashion. I spoke again: "For God's sake, tell me what's wrong. I only want to help you."

His voice shocked me when it came. It was pitched low down in his throat, and was half submerged in awful strangling gasps. His words were spaced far apart.

"Suppose you'd come home, after dining out," he said, "and found the wife you loved in the arms of another man!"

"O Lord!" I muttered. "I shouldn't have bothered you."

"The wife you'd—you'd believed in," he went on, ignoring my comment, "kissing her lover, as mine did, three hours ago, under our own roof! What would you have done?"

I squirmed miserably in my seat. "I'm damn sorry,' for your sake."

"Sorrow cannot cure me," he gurgled. "I asked you what—what you?—what—what—"

"Why, I guess I'd have cut my throat!" I flung back at him on the spur of the moment, for want of something better to say.

He turned his eyes directly upon me for the first time, in a wild and terrible stare.

"That's just what I've done," he croaked.

Almost before the full significance of the statement had reached my brain, the man's hands jerked up and wrenched open his overcoat. The motion sent him top-pling sideways. He rolled from the seat to the floor and lay stretched at my feet. His throat had been slashed with a razor blade, deeply but clumsily. The windpipe had been merely wounded, and the main artery could not have been severed. His long survival and his ability to talk proved those points. Nevertheless, he had given himself a mortal gash which had been bleeding copiously under his overcoat. His breast was a sheet of gore. The fall to the floor sent a new stream of blood spouting, his eyes became glazed, and with a final spasm his spirit fled.

Instinctively, I uttered a shout for help. But the roaring of the train in the subway tunnel must have drowned it out. Probably the car ahead also was empty, and the new mechanical system of operating the doors has done away with conductors except at long intervals. In any case, no one answered my call.

And then I had a second thought—a selfish one— concerning the situation.

The man at my feet undoubtedly was dead. I tested his pulse and found that it had ceased to beat.

He was a self-confessed suicide, and yet if I reported the tragedy I would have a hard time explaining what had happened. There had been no witnesses. The police might hold me as a possible murderer, at least until after the inquest. This was a case in which justice would really operate more simply if the body were discovered in the ordinary course of events. The nature of the wound would then point straight to suicide, uncomplicated by the fantastic and almost unbelievable story I had to tell.

I rushed to the door just as we reached the Atlantic Avenue station. No passengers were waiting at that end of the platform, to see me alight. I felt the satisfaction at a canny get-away that a criminal might have felt in similar circumstances.

Horribly shaken, however, when I reached the street, I wandered around blindly for a while. A policeman would have been justified in asking me what I was up to, but luckily for me policemen seldom seem to accost the fellows who are fresh from gruesome scenes or violent deeds. As my mind cleared, I considered the events of the whole evening with growing amazement. It was infinitely beyond the usual hazards of adventure that I should have stumbled upon two such happenings, one on the psychic plane and one on the physical. A notion that they were in some way connected plagued me, apparently without reason.

I formulated a weird theory that, because Daniel Buwalda was a black sorcerer, my demonstrated sensitiveness to his magic had laid me open to monstrous hallucinations. Suppose the suicide in the subway car were only a dream, I thought. Suppose I were fated to experience many other similar waking dreams of terror!

But I finished by condemning my imaginings as morbid. I hailed a belated cruising taxi, jumped in and rode home and to bed.

If my sleep was disturbed by visions such as any one is likely to have, following an exciting experience, I do not remember them. I only know that my first conscious desire in the morning was to look at the newspaper. I felt sure there would be an account of the death of the man on the train, and everybody is familiar with the thrill that comes from reading a newspaper story about a tragedy one has himself witnessed.

I leaped out of bed and ran to get my Tribune on the landing. But a hasty glance down every column in the paper failed to locate what I was seeking. It then occurred to me that since the corpse could not have been found until about 1:30 A. M., it was unreasonable to expect a report in a regular morning edition. My next move seems to me, as I look back upon it, to have been significant. I was trembling with eagerness to see a newspaper report of some sort. I could not wait until I dressed and left the house. Why? Did I have a subconscious impression of what I was destined to learn ? I shall leave it to my readers to form their own opinions on that point.

Anyway, I recalled that the tabloid press prints "afternoon editions" shortly after dawn and starts circulating them between 9 and 10. It was then ten o'clock on a Saturday morning, I may add, and I did not have to go to the office that day. I rang furiously for the janitor and gave him money with which to buy me the available early editions. He returned a few minutes later, looking considerably bored, and handed me two pictorial sheets. I spread them out on my dining table. The first did not have the news I sought.

The second screamed the following in my face: JAMES GRIFFIN, BANK PRESIDENT, TAKES LIFE IN SUBWAY Underneath the headline, there was a whole page of pictures. I'd not have needed the caption to identify the portrait of the dead man. But Griffin had ceased to be the main feature of the mystery, as far as I was concerned. The second portrait displayed was of vastly more interest. It was a portrait of his wife, "The Noted Beauty," as the paper called her, and she was that .same Coralie Griffin whom I had seen assist Buwalda with the tambourine and the screen.

Other photographs on that fateful page were an exterior view of the Griffin home and a view of the library, the latter being described as containing "a notable collection of first editions." I was already familiar with these scenes, for they had each been twice imprinted on my brain. They represented the same house and the same library which had materialized before ray inner vision while Buwalda was performing his experiment.

The news article which accompanied these pictures was, in the main, a lurid account of the finding of Griffin's body by two employees of the subway who had entered the car at Prospect Park Plaza, two stations beyond the point where I had quit. The question of possible foul play was not raised. A medical officer from the police department had said that the wound could only have been inflicted with a safety razor blade, detached from its holder. His obvious conclusion had been that it was self-inflicted. An autostrop blade, indeed, was later fished out of the pool of blood on the floor of the car.

The reporter told of the astonishment of friends and business associates at Griffin's act, which they ascribed to a fit of temporary insanity. But I cannot do better than to quote the following: "James Griffin was believed by all his friends to be one of the happiest and most successful of men. His home life was ideal. Although only forty-three years old, he had been president for the past six years of the powerful Wheat Exchange Bank and enjoyed the confidence of Wall Street's inner circle of international financiers. Mrs. Griffin, who returned home at a late hour last night after visiting friends in Brooklyn, was prostrated at the news of her husband's death and declined to be interviewed."

I sat-back, more than half convinced that if any one in this business were mad, it must be myself. Why, I had had it from Griffin's own lips that he had killed himself because he had caught his wife in the arms of a lover! He had seen them together three hours before his meeting with me, he had said. And a man does not tell a lie immediately after he had cut his throat! But those three hours set back the time of the incident to 10 P. M. At io P. M. Coralie Griffin had been on the platform with Daniel Buwalda, in the house on Baltic Street. I was a witness to the fact. She had been receiving from the medium's hand a tambourine that had been passed through solid matter, and at the same moment I had seen pictures of the Griffin library, the exterior of the Griffin town house.

The figure of a tall man had moved across those scenes. James Griffin, the subway suicide, had been a tall man. What in God's name did it all mean?

I sought a brief refuge in the idea that Coralie had gotten home in time to be seen by her husband, and that the latter had misstated the hour to me. But no.

She had left Baltic Street somewhat later than I had, and it was physically impossible for her to have reached West 72nd Street and for Griffin to have ridden back to Brooklyn within the forty minutes or so available. Besides, his spying upon the illicit rendezvous, the process of his decision upon a course of action, must also have occupied a certain amount of time.

A cold sweat gathered upon my forehead. I lurched to my feet and commenced mechanically to go through the commonplace motions of my morning toilet. Before I finished dressing, I had concluded that I did not know enough about the occult to wrestle with the mystery unaided.

It was then that I made up my mind to go to my brother, Owen, and confide unreservedly in him.

Owen Purcell is one of the most singular characters of our times. He is fifteen years older than I, an analytical chemist by profession and a recluse by choice. I scarcely knew him in my childhood. When I first began to take notice of things, Owen was in college, and I do not recall that he ever spent a full vacation period at home. He would take special summer courses under German professors with jaw-breaking names and degrees. One Christmas when he arrived two days late for the festivities, I heard him explain brusquely that he had passed Christmas Day in the library of the university completing a thesis on aconite, the deadliest poison known to man.

He ignored my very existence, and if he gave a trifling amount of attention to our sister, Eleanor, it was because she was older than I and by no means the sort of girl to wait meekly until she was spoken to.

When Owen quit college, he got a well-paid job with a private laboratory in Manhattan. Waving aside the suggestion that he live at home, he took a topfloor apartment on Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, overlooking the harbor, lined 'the walls with books, and practically cut himself off from ordinary social intercourse. He occasionally visited our parents, but could not be induced to come if there were to be strangers present.

I have always been profoundly impressed—intimidated, somewhat—by his appearance and the impenetrable reserve of his manner. His eyes are startlingly black in his pale face. I have never seen them express an emotion, and unless he is talking his full-lipped mouth is as immobile as if carved from stone.

I had been a student of spiritualism for four years before I learned that Owen, also, was interested in the occult. But the chasm between his knowledge and my superficial observation of phenomena is a vast one. I was led to consult him by a curious happening of vital consequence to my happiness. The story has already been placed on record and need not be repeated here.

It is enough to say that, while attempting to communicate with the departed spirit of a girl I had loved, I saw Owen's face materialize in an ink-stain with a clarity equal to the results that may be had from crystal gazing. Naturally, I told him about it. He found the fact of scientific importance, and this caused him to admit to me that he was an adept.

"The dead girl conjured up my face in the inkstain, to send you to me, to make you tell me your story, to bring me into the affair as a medium," he said.

Together, we proceeded to hold a private seance, at which unforgettable messages from the Great Beyond were transmitted to me. When it was over, Owen reminded me sternly that such adventures into the psychic were far removed from the child's play of table tipping. They drained the strength of the medium, he declared, and he forbade me to come to him with any but the most serious problems.

I had not again asked him to help me in an experiment. I had not bothered him with accounts of my own efforts as an amateur. But I felt reasonably certain now that he would want to hear the details of the Buwalda-Griffin mystery.

Eleven o'clock had just struck when I arrived at Owen's Columbia Heights flat. He was at home, as I had assumed he would be on a Saturday morning, and he received me in an old claret-colored dressing gown held by a thick cord at the waist. He looked like a medieval monk. I think the solitary fellow was not overly glad to see me, and my foreword regarding my errand failed to win even the flicker of an eyelash. But he led the way to his favorite window seat, lighted a cigarette and gazed at the distant outline of the Woolworth Building as I commenced to talk.

I knew at the end of fifteen minutes that I had captured his attention. He had allowed his cigarette to go out. Then his head turned slowly towards me.

"Let's have that again, Hugh," he said. "You couldn't detect any sleight of hand work on Buwalda's part. But when the tambourine touched the wooden screen, you saw an action picture of James Griffin in his library?"

"I can't be sure it was Griffin. There was the silhouette of a tall man, and it surely resembled the newspaper photograph of Griffin."

"Well—there were other pictures. You saw the house, a woman, two men. The scenes were fragments of the very episode which Griffin with his cut throat sketched to you as being the cause of his suicide."

"That is so," I agreed, shuddering. Owen's interpretation had been at the back of my mind, but I had balked at stating it to myself so clearly.

"And yet part of the episode must have been imagined by Griffin. He may have been at his house, in his library—he probably was—but he did not see his wife being kissed by a lover. She was in Brooklyn, about ten miles away. He only thought he saw her."

Before I could answer, Owen jumped to his feet and started to pace the room, touched by an excitement that was unlike him.

" 'Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings!' " he jeered acidly.

"What do you mean by that?" I demanded.

"I mean that you—-a youngster, a novice—have brought me something that promises to add considerably to my wisdom. I've been trying for years to chart a certain law which I assume must govern most, if not all, of the manifestations we call psychic. I've never even been able to place my finger upon the key-fact of that law. Then you visit me of a Saturday morning and tell me you've seen what may well be the great law at work, deliberately used by a medium, and under chartable conditions. I'm not indulging in irony. Pardon me if it seems that way. I'm merely envious of your luck and grateful to you for giving me the tip."

"My God, Owen, you've got to explain this to me!"

I cried. "If you're going to investigate, you've got to let me share in it."

He pulled up short beside the center table, rested his palms upon it and stared at me. "Let you share in it!"

he repeated. "Hm! You might be useful, at that, if you're willing to obey orders."

"Of course, I'll do what you tell me, Owen. But don't forget that last night's adventure happened to me and not to you. First rights in it are mine."

"I deny any one's right to anything he can't master and I can," he replied arrogantly. "All the same, you're my brother, and you understand the occult a little. We'll work together. I tell you, Hugh, your Daniel Buwalda is on the track of knowledge which may enable him to control the world. And we're, on the track of Buwalda."

"Explain what he did last night," I pleaded.

"Good. The man announces himself as a mind reader, doesn't he? He appears to be successful at simple tests along that line?"

"Yes."

"In other words, he practices telepathy. You are familiar with the theory that the subconscious mind is devoid of will power. It is a storehouse of memory, and not only does it yield information on demand, but it obeys any suggestion that reaches it. The objective, or conscious, mind of any given individual freely taps his subconscious and issues orders to it. The process, however, is instinctive. We are scarcely aware that it is going on."

"I believe so."

"But if I get into contact telepathically with you and know it at the time, I should be able to dictate to your subconscious mind. Mind reading would be only one half of the phenomenon. The other half would be mind control."

"I think I see what you're driving at."

"Bravo! But let me state it. Every one has had spasmodic experiences with telepathy. He has read a mind, or he has had his read. Not understanding the law governing the matter, however, he has not been able to direct the experience or to repeat it at will. He has been at the same loss concerning the uses of telepathy as the eighteenth-century scientists were, face to face with electricity, before Benjamin Franklin sent up his kite."

"But Buwalda—"

"Precisely. Buwalda seems to have isolated the keyfact of the law. If that is so, we may believe that he leaped mentally across the space dividing them, took charge of the mind of James Griffin, made him see his wife in an imaginary lover's arms, suggested to him that the only cure for his grief was suicide."

"Good God! It was murder," I gasped.

"Certainly it was murder. Murder by suggestion.

But you can't send a man to the electric chair for that."

"Why were the pictures of what Griffin was doing in his house recorded upon my brain?"

"That is an interesting detail. I do not pretend to understand it fully, as yet. Possibly your own psychic activities have made you sensitive to such impressions.

You intercepted Buwalda's thought waves, as a radio receiver picks up a station to which it is ordinarily not attuned. Let it go at that. It is valuable evidence.

We shall study it later."

"Did Buwalda know that I was cutting in on him?"

"Probably not. He'd hardly have continued the experiment if he had. Once again, the fact that you were an initiate served you in good stead. You threw up a barrier against an invasion from Buwalda's mind.

Every one will be able to do that, when telepathy has been charted. Nature invariably supplies an antidote, or a defense. But for the present, the vast majority is at the mercy of a fellow like Buwalda."

I crouched lower on the window seat, one leg drawn up under me, a chill of terror mounting to my heart.

"Owen, tell me what the tambourine and the screen had to do with all this?" I mumbled.

"Ah, the master sorcery itself!" my brother cried.

His voice and the expression on his face were almost gloating, a surprising display of emotion from him.

"Sorcery!—how sorcery?" I babbled.

"A figure of speech, my dear chap. When a man begins to manipulate the unknown, it is always sorcery to his fellows. Now listen carefully to me. I have long suspected that the. law of telepathy and the fourth dimension would be discovered at the same time, that they have something to do with each other."

"Why drag in such an abstraction as the fourth dimension?" I protested. "It's impossible even to guess at what the fourth dimension might be."

"Is it?" mocked Owen softly. "I can at least make you see that it is perhaps a very simple thing which we fail to recognize because our eyes have never been opened to the facts that govern it.

"The three recognized dimensions are height, width and thickness," he went on, placing his fingertips together and talking exactly as he might have talked to a boy in a junior grade in school. "We move about in what we believe to be a three-dimensional world, and that means that we can move backwards and forwards, to right and left, and up and down.

"I ask you now to imagine you are a creature with a hard, unelastic body—like a beetle, say. Imagine yourself existing between two enormous panes of crystal-clear glass, suspended at some distance above the earth. The glass presses firmly against your stomach and your back, but you are free to travel as far as you choose to North and South, to East and West. You slide of sidle along, if you get what I mean, but you cannot rise or fall by so much as the fraction of an inch.

"Such a creature would be living in a strictly twodimensional world. You could see the earth and the sky through the glass, but you would have no sense of perspective concerning them. They would seem to form flat patterns, and it would be impossible for you to conceive of anything having height and depth, or of any living creature moving up and down. You would jeer at theories about a third dimension.

"If a god should come along, however, and lift the top pane of glass away, you would suddenly find yourself in a three-dimensional world, and it would really be very easy for you to adjust yourself to it."

"We may be shown how to step into the fourth dimension with equal facility. I get your point. Your fable illustrates it quite neatly," I answered. "But that isn't defining a possible fourth dimension."

"Suppose it should be throughth," murmured Owen.

"Throughth!" I exclaimed indignantly. "What sort of a word is that?"

"A word coined by mystics to describe the imaginable passing of one body of solid matter, unchanged, through another, as radio passes through the atmosphere and radium through everything. Buwalda performed that miracle with the tambourine and the screen, or we'll assume he did. He demonstrated the fourth dimension, perhaps. Simultaneously, he was enabled to make James Griffin see visions and decide to cut his throat. The second marvel might not have been workable without the first. Complete interpenetration of minds may rest upon the ability of the medium to practice material throughth!"

I covered my face with my hands, recalling dazedly how Buwalda had said the day was at hand when a mortal body would find it no problem "to walk unscathed through a rock."

"This is all too deep for me," I muttered.

"To be sure. There's a lot yet for both of us to learn. Let's forget magic for the present and get down to the practical end of this investigation."

"One minute, Owen," I said. "Was Coralie Griffin's aid essential to the success of Buwalda's coup?

I know he had to have an assistant to receive the tambourine. But would anybody else have done?"

"Anybody, I think. The woman's part seems to have been entirely passive."

"It's strange that he should have used her, nevertheless. Her own husband was to be destroyed!"

"Buwalda probably enjoyed that combination of circumstances for its own sake. Fiends of his sort are generally sardonic. Ask yourself why he chose Griffin as the victim, in the first place."

"Because he was in love with Coralie and wanted to eliminate his legal rival?"

"Exactly. The inference is plain. Now, to work.

There's a copy of one of Jules Bois's books on demonology, on the seat there under your hand. Look it over while I dress. It contains some sound stuff."

"Where do you intend for us to go?" I asked.

"To the house on Baltic Street, of course."

"You can't mean it. Buwalda won't tell us a tiling.

We'll just arouse his suspicions."

Owen smiled bleakly. "You will show me the house, and I shall enter it alone. I'll not be recognized, and I'll know how to give a plausible excuse for calling. A few minutes will suffice."

"What on earth do you expect to learn in a few minutes?"

"You evidently don't appreciate how important Buwalda is—if true," he drawled. "You saw a man named Griffin die in the subway last night; the newspapers check up on that. But how much of what you report as happening on Baltic Street was fact, and how much hallucination, is another question again. Until I've looked at Buwalda, talked to him, appraised him for myself, he has the advantage over me."

I felt like a child beside my brother, and though my lips moved I could find no words with which to answer him.

Half an hour later, we left the house, and as cabs were seldom to be found at that far end of the Heights we commenced to walk southwards. A crisp snow, sullied by few feet, lay on the pavement. The air was dry, invigorating and not too cold. A golden sunshine flooded the city. The weather conveyed a subtle suggestion of Spring treading close at the heels of Winter. There are more deceptive days like that in February than in March.

We came to the quaint, hump-backed footbridge that spans Montague Street above the disused car tracks running down to a forgotten ferry. The Penny Bridge, the children of the neighborhood call it, but the origin of the name is lost in antiquity as such things go in the short and fevered history of New York.

I have imagined that the children of a hundred years ago invented some game that called for the payment of a penny toll for crossing the bridge. The notion recurred to me and I mentioned it to Owen as he and I stepped over its planks. But he cares little for the picturesque details of the world about him. He grumbled a vague reply and quickened his pace. We had tacitly abandoned the idea of a cab, for the distance we had to go was not great, and we hurried by way of Remsen and Clinton Streets until we came to Baltic. At the corner, we paused.

"You are sure of the number of the house?" asked Owen. "Do you recognize it for any other reason than its number?"

"Yes. It's that dingy three-story house next to the grocery."

"All right. You wait here, and be as inconspicuous as possible. I'll not be long."

He strode away from me, mounted the steps with unhesitating assurance and rang the bell. Several minutes passed, and the door had not been opened.

He rang again. The situation worried me. I had not been fully converted to the wisdom of this visit to Buwalda, that creature of infinite cunning, that mind reader who might be able to divine who Owen was and why he had come. Heaven alone knew what he might do in rebuttal.

But presently the door was pulled ajar and a person I could not identify talked to Owen, without admitting him. The drift of the conversation was unsatisfactory, for I saw my brother stiffen as if in surprise.

Suddenly, he turned about and waved to me to join him.

Deeply mystified, I left my post at the corner and climbed the steps to his side.

"Hugh, the landlord here, Mr. Schultz, tells me that Mr. Buwalda moved away this morning," he said in a studied, matter-of-fact tone.

"Yep. He left suddenly," Schultz repeated for my benefit. "The moving vans was lined up outside the house at eight o'clock and by noon he was gone, bag and baggage. Wasn't nothing wrong about it, though.

His rent was paid until the end of March."

"It's too bad I missed him," Owen remarked. "I wanted to return some books he valued a lot. You say you don't know his new address?"

"Haven't the least idea where he went."

"Did you notice what express company came to get his furniture?"

"Can't say as I did."

I had remained outwardly calm in the face of news that wrapped Buwalda and his actions in a final sinister cloak of mystery. Now I was inspired to ask an apparently idle question, which brought valuable results.

"What are you going to do about renting your house?" I demanded.

"Well—I live in the basement myself," Schultz replied. "I guess I'll make the upper floors over into separate flats. Mr. Buwalda never did use the top floor, though he paid rent on it." He paused and looked us over in a speculative way. "Maybe you gentlemen would be interested in a nice cheap apartment?"

"You never can tell. No harm in looking at what you've got," cut in Owen quickly. "A desirable parlor floor might tempt me."

Schultz threw open the door and bowed us in. "The front and back parlors are in grand condition. Mr.

Buwalda used them only for his meetings, once a week. Some sort of a religious society—very respectable people. But I'll redecorate to suit."

"That sounds fine," yawned Owen. I could tell that he considered it important to examine the premises and was glad that he had not had to ask permission to do so. I failed, however, to guess at the object of his quest.

Together, we crossed the threshold into the rooms where the seance had been held the evening before.

They had been stripped bare. Even the purple cloth hangings and the wooden platform had been removed.

Owen walked straight to the far end where the platform had been. His eyes swept the walls, and then roved slowly over the floor. I caught a sign of impatience in the twitching of the little fingers of both his hands.

"The house smells musty," he said abruptly to Schultz. "Would you mind going upstairs and throwing the windows open before we look at the other floors?"

"Whatever you want done, sir," replied the landlord innocently, and hastened off to obey.

The moment he was out of sight, Owen dropped to his hands and knees and scrutinized the various holes in the floor where screws and nails had held the platform steady. He also tapped the planking with his knuckles, and ran the blade of a pocket knife down all the crevices. Then he arose, shrugging his shoulders.

"I thought I might find traces of some mechanism for producing stage illusions. I'm glad I didn't. It would have taken the spice out of this investigation.

But only a fool neglects to watch out for faking."

"If there was legerdemain last night, Buwalda performed it all with his own hands."

"So it seems."

Owen made a rapid circuit of that end of the room, glancing up and down the walls once more. He halted sharply, almost at the spot where I had sat as a member of the audience, stooped and picked up a small object which had been lying close to the baseboard.

"Pretty! Very pretty!" he muttered. "I wonder to whom it belongs."

He handed me a gold brooch of old-fashioned design, in which a handsome opal was set. It was the kind of ornament that women used to wear on their bosoms during the middle decades of the past century. Nowadays it might serve to keep a scarf in place.

"Some one in last night's crowd dropped it," I suggested.

"Probably. I call your attention to the fact that the setting is based upon astrological symbols. Virgo and Scorpio and the sign of the moon are interwoven in filigree work. It is Oriental, and the real thing. A charm, no doubt."

It was on the tip of my tongue to remind him that I believed Coralie Griffin to be an Armenian woman, and therefore the likeliest owner of the brooch. But the return of the landlord silenced me. Owen dropped the jewel carelessly into his side pocket and we followed Schultz upstairs.

We no longer cared a rap about that empty house.

After glancing into the various rooms and cheering Schultz with hollow platitudes about the excellence of the terms he offered us, we contrived to get back to the front door within ten minutes. I was choking with eagerness to be alone with Owen, where no one could overhear us, and to discuss the latest developments in our great affair. I started as soon as we had reached the foot of the stoop.

"Buwalda has been eking out an existence here as a professional medium, half charlatan and half mystic.

He paraded his minor accomplishments in return for the five-dollar admission fees he needed to live. But last night he was successful for the first time at black magic. After that, the pack of little disciples would only have hampered him. He fled mainly to shake them off."

"That's good logic on your part. He'll want to work in absolute secrecy from now on. It's our problem to find him," declared Owen.

"At least, we know how to trace the woman, Coralie. Buwalda will never be very far away from her."

"True. I foresee that we shall have to learn to be detectives—"

I cut his speech short by jolting his arm with my elbow. "Owen," I breathed without moving my lips, "Buwalda is coming down the street toward us right now."

Though he was half a short block away, I had recognized in a flash the lean figure and triangular jaw of the medium. He had turned the corner from Court Street and was advancing with long strides. It was easy to guess that he was returning to his old house to get something that had been left behind, and three chances to one the lost object was the opal and gold brooch.

"Drop out of step with me, and cross to the opposite sidewalk," hissed Owen. "Let me meet him alone."

The time for argument had passed, and I felt anyway that it would be disastrous for Buwalda to encounter me in ribs block. I must trust everything to my brother's judgment. He had scarcely finished speaking when I made a conventional gesture of farewell and sauntered into the roadway. Upon reaching the pavement, I glanced back cautiously.

Owen and Buwalda were now within a few feet of each other. The former drew a pack of cigarettes from his pocket and placed a cigarette between his lips. Then he stopped dead, and I could tell from the careless pantomime of his lips and hands that he was asking the medium for a light.

Buwalda's first reaction was normal enough. He slowed down and yet continued to move restlessly, almost completing a circle about Owen as he felt for a match. He found one and gave it to him. My brother spoke again, and this was evidently the cause of a remarkable right-about-face. Buwalda turned, and abandoning his errand at the empty house he hurried madly back in the direction of Court Street.

Owen stared after the retreating figure in surprise that was assuredly no greater than mine. I was already on my way to rejoin him.

"What on earth did you say to Buwalda?" I asked.

"Nothing much. I remarked that it was a fine day.

Any commonplace, you know, that would give me a chance to hear his voice. He seemed to pierce to my motive before the words were out of my lips. You saw what he did. Come on. Let's trail after him. The harm's already done. We might as well discover where he goes."

Buwalda did not give us a single glance, to find out whether we were following. He was almost at the corner now, and though we broke into a run we lost him for a moment as he swung into Court Street. When we saw him again, he was in the middle of the roadway, struggling against the traffic to reach the farther side of the street. A monstrous truck was in his way and a string of taxicabs was pressing closely at the tail of the truck. At that moment a policeman's whistle sounded, and the mass of vehicles came to a halt.

Buwalda was left standing on the near side of the middle of the truck. He would have had to go to the end of the block to find a crevice through which he could squeeze.

"This doesn't do us a whole lot of good," said Owen. "We can't seize him by the arm and catechize him."

"Why—for God's sake!—" I shot back. "He isn't there any longer."

The thing I had stated was bewilderingly true.

Buwalda had vanished. But, as the traffic lurched forward anew, we saw over the tops of the taxicabs a luxurious limousine which was just beginning to move from its parking place on the opposite curb. The medium was lolling against the cushions, and beside him was a dark woman muffled in furs. Of her features, only the curve of one cheek and half-closed eyelids with long black eyelashes were visible. I needed no more evidence than that to tell me that she was Coralie Griffin.

The limousine gathered momentum and glided northwards. It was lost to sight in an instant.

Owen's cigarette had remained unlighted. He struck a match now and started to smoke with imperturbable calm.

"Well, Hugh," he said blandly, "if Buwalda is able to move so fast that he eludes the human eye, it is physically possible for him to have gone down on all fours and to have dodged under the truck. But—"

"But you and I know he did nothing of the kind,"

I answered.

"It would certainly appear that he passed clear through the truck, instead. Such power makes him about the most dangerous man in the world for us to fight. But we re going to fight him."

If I have written anything to give the reader the idea that my brother Owen had been, up till that day, a man of action in the ordinary physical meaning of the term, then I have erred. I recall the occasion when I tried to interest him in the house of the sick ghosts on Vine Street, Brooklyn. The place had been a private hospital, and it appeared to be haunted by memories of human suffering, rather than by visible phantoms. The tenants had the illusion that they were suffering from fantastic maladies. A singular phase of demonism, indeed. Yet my brother had refused to exert himself to the point of walking a few blocks, to look into it. He had seemed to care only for the lore he found in books.

So, Owen's swift foray to the house on Baltic Street, after hearing my story about the medium, Buwalda, had been a rare exhibition of energy on his part. As we stood now in the wake of the thinning traffic and I listened to his declaration of war to the end against Daniel Buwalda, I thought I had reason to hope that we were to share equally in the thrills and dangers of this unique affair. But I should have known my brother better than that.

Already his eyes were beginning to cloud, and his lonely spirit to withdraw behind its mask of impenetrable reserve. His muscles visibly relaxed. When he spoke, his lips moved without elasticity.

A stranger would have been convinced that nothing in life could earn either a smile or a sneer from Owen.

"I am going home now, Hugh," he muttered.

"There are preparations to be made for a seance of our own. I must consult the books."

"What books are you referring to?" I asked curiously.

"The literature of the occult includes certain books unknown to dabblers like yourself."

"Well, why not initiate me? I'm eager to be an adept, too. Let's study together. You could read aloud to me, and explain."

"No, no!" he answered impatiently. "I must be alone, to concentrate. I must have absolute quiet. You'll be initiated fast enough when I admit you to a seance.

For the present, I want you to follow up Buwalda.

Find out where he has gone to live, if possible. Trace him through the members of that spiritualistic circle of his—perhaps through the little secretary who sat at the door and sold tickets."

"But we agreed that he'd probably cut loose from the circle for ever," I objected.

"He may have kept the secretary," he said, with a bored air.

"How am I to find her any more easily than I could find Buwalda?"

"Do I know? It seems to me that detectives make use of such clues, and put two and two together. I simply tell you to exhaust the possibilities in searching for that man."

Effective though he was in all matters relating to chemistry and to magic, it was astonishing how vague Owen could be when the problem was one relating to everyday human activity.

"Shall I do any spying at the Griffin home?" I asked.

"Not until after the funeral, I think. Buwalda would not dare to be there, and you could not explain your presence if caught. Later you can shadow Coralie from her house, with good hopes of her leading you to Buwalda."

"She did not hesitate to join him this very morning.

We saw them together in the car."

"Ah, yes! But this is a morning of confusion, of dealing with the situation created by suicide in a public place," answered Owen shrewdly. "By the afternoon, James Griffin's body will be out of the morgue, and Coralie will be forced to behave like a grieving and respectable widow."

"Then you leave the investigation to me, to conduct as best I can."

"The physical side of it, yes—at least for the present. Come to my apartment tonight, no earlier than, eleven o'clock, and report. If I have formulated a theory, I may possibly be ready to show you something."

Owen waved his hand in a sketchy gesture of farewell, and turned on his heel down the nearest cross street.

I walked along slowly, wondering how I should set about my assignment. I had read a good deal of detective fiction in my time, and had often thought it should not be so difficult to duplicate the feats of the master sleuths in tracking missing persons. Now I felt like a helpless amateur. If the landlord, Schultz, on Baltic Street, had been unable to give us a hint of the destination of his tenant's moving vans, what likelihood was there that I could locate any one in this neighborhood who was better advised than he had been? I thought of making a round of cigar stores and groceries. The medium had surely patronized such places, and a description of his bizarre countenance, if not his name, should be recognized. But I knew that my inquiry would be halted right there. Buwalda was not the man to have confided his plans to storekeepers.

After many minutes of pondering, however, it came to me that there was one line of inquiry which might be followed profitably. If Coralie Griffin were an Armenian, as I suspected, it was possible that she had connections in the Oriental quarter centering about Atlantic Avenue. She and Buwalda might have used one of the coffee shops of her people as a place of rendezvous. It was at least likely that they had sometimes dropped in for coffee and pastry, following the meetings of the spiritualistic circle. I had done the same thing myself the night before, and the -place I had chosen was the one most convenient to the house on Baltic Street. I decided to revisit it.

Seen in the light of day, the Ararat, as it was called, was an eating place in which gaudy decorations contrasted with the shabby clothing of the majority of the patrons. The latter were small produce merchants with a sprinkling of rug-peddlers, I figured. The cake and candy counter was a blaze of color, but over it hung a pall of smoke from innumerable Levantine cigarettes that gave a queer sweetish tang to the atmosphere.

I had no sooner entered than I perceived that some question of uncommon interest was agitating the clientele. Newspapers were being flourished in every hand, but these papers were printed in Armenian or Syrian script which says nothing at all to Western eyes. A page in either language looks as if it had been executed in scroll-work by an expert penman, rather than by a printer. A babel of talk incomprehensible to me was in full swing.

The men within easy call of where I sat were too absorbed in the debate to pay attention when I addressed them. Perhaps they did not understand me.

But the waiter necessarily spoke a little English, and I asked him what was exciting his compatriots. To my surprise, he gave me a suspicious look, shrugged his shoulders and mumbled an evasive reply.

There are few things so exasperating as a vain attempt to get the drift of conversation in a foreign tongue, when one believes that the subject is important.

And through some quirk of intuition, I felt that on no account must I fail to discover what was now being said. My nerves grew taut, and the attention I paid to the clamor of exotic words produced a condition that was almost hypnotic. Then I had an idea. I turned a menu card face down, took a pencil from my pocket and posed the tip lightly upon the blank back of the card. Half closing my eyes and glancing away, I laid myself open to the workings of automatic writing.

It may seem strange to the reader that results could be obtained in a crowded and noisy restaurant. But the simpler manifestations of psychic activity do not call for special conditions, if one is a practiced sensitive. After a little while, the pencil began to move, and this is what I read: "The old man—you saw him—white mustache— he will help."

Much beguiled by the cryptic message, I scrutinized all the faces in the room, and presently I discovered that at a table in a far corner was seated the patriarch I had noticed the night before with four young girls I had supposed to be his granddaughters. Two chairs beside him were vacant. I arose quietly and walked over to him.

"Do you mind if I sit here?" I asked.

He turned on me a pair of alert eyes, round and shining as agates. "I have no objection, of course, sir,"

he replied in perfect English.

I took one of the chairs, and spoke again promptly.

"As a writer for magazines, a foreign setting like this in the heart of Brooklyn is fascinating to me," I said, using the first approach that came into my head.

"You are a writer!" he exclaimed, interested. "For the newspapers, too?"

"Sometimes."

"Then, perhaps, you can help us to stop the spreading of a cruel scandal. You have happened to come here on a day when there is quite a controversy among "So I see. What is it all about?"

"It concerns the good name of a relative of mine—r a woman."

A premonition that he was about to speak of Coralie possessed me as definitely as if he had already shouted the name in my ear. "Yes!" I prodded him gently.

"You have read of the suicide of the Wall Street banker, James Griffin?"

"I have."

"His widow is my niece. Her maiden name was Kanarjian, which is my name too. She fell under the influence of an evil man, one Daniel Buwalda. We Armenians are very jealous of the honor of our women, sir, and I cannot believe that she did anything worse than follow the teachings of the fellow, who is some sort of religious fanatic. But it is being said here that she was his mistress, and that Mr. Griffin killed himself because of grief when he found it out."

"How much do the people in this restaurant really know about the matter?"

"Little enough, sir. But we are a small community, and it is the Armenian way to talk about his neighbor's business. My niece was so rash as to come here at times, very late in the evening, with Buwalda."

"Has the gossip been published in your dialect newspapers?"

"Not yet, but I fear it may be. The company is excited over the accounts of Griffin's death. He was a good man, who gave a great deal of money to Armenian charities."

"And how do you think a writer like myself might help in the English papers?"

"If you were to expose Buwalda for the charlatan that he is, my niece might come to her senses and the scandalmongers be silenced," he declared himself quaintly.

Before I could reply, however, Kanarjian leaped to his feet and commenced to harangue the crowd in the stuttering, harsh syllables of his native tongue. It was maddening not to understand what he was saying, especially as his words served to fan higher the flame of turmoil. I questioned him with an eager stare when he sat down again.

"I told them that instead of slandering a woman, they might better find the Turk and attack him like men," he said.

"The Turk!" I repeated. "What Turk?"

"Buwalda, of course."

"But surely he is not a Turk?"

"What is he, then? Nobody knows. When we Armenians despise any one, we call him a Turk. I also told these people that they would have a different song to sing when Peter arrives."

"You discourse in riddles, Mr. Kanarjian," I commented, smiling. "May I ask you who Peter is?"

"A thousand pardons! Peter is my nephew and a first cousin of Coralie Griffin. He has always loved her. He will not tolerate this spitting upon her name.

Ah, they had better look out for themselves when Peter comes!"

The byplay of Oriental passions had added a new element of the fantastic to the affair, as far as I was concerned. But I was worried at the drift of the old Armenian's policy. An open feud, with Buwalda under fire for an unproved social offence, could do no possible good. It might result in driving Coralie into hiding, while the cunning medium would certainly keep the more resolutely out of sight.

"Have you any idea where Buwalda is now?" I asked, on a long chance.

"He has a house near here. We can easily find out the address."

I thought it wiser not to break the news to Kanarjian that Buwalda had fled. A few seconds later, the door of the coffee shop opened and a young man came in. A brief silence fell upon the crowd. It was curious how one could sense that timid spirits were wilting at the mere appearance of a strong personality.

But at certain tables the chattering quickly recommenced.

The newcomer came straight to us and sat down.

He was a handsome Armenian about thirty years old, Americanized in dress and manner. A tight little black mustache was the only foreign touch about him. I liked him instantly, with one of those unreasoning feelings of comradeship of which the human animal is fortunately capable.

The older man introduced him to me as Peter Kanarjian, and then burst into a vehement speech in Armenian. I could tell that it was an account of the row that had been going on, for the men at the nearest tables paid frank attention to it and punctuated it with jeers. Peter's face blanched to a pallor that caused the closely shaved hair under his skin to stand out like blue stains. His .uncle had no sooner finished speaking than he stood up abruptly, and with a forward thrust of his body he shook his fist at the gossipers. I noted a bulge in his coat at the back, and I guessed that in spite of his conventional exterior he was carrying a revolver.

Peter was not of the breed that contents itself with threatening. He uttered only one word, which I afterwards learned was equivalent to, "Retract!" Then, as there came no satisfactory reply he swept two chairs out of his way and started toward his enemies.

Bedlam broke loose in the coffee shop. Knives and guns were swiftly produced. Parties at the different tables became hostile camps, as the men took sides for or against Peter. The latter chanced to have foes on three sides of him, and would probably have been killed if the fracas had gone beyond the shouting stage.

But luckily I was the first to reach him. I seized his arm.

"For God's sake, listen!" I cried. "Bloodshed will get her name into the big American newspapers. The cause of the quarrel, you see. You don't want that."

He veered and looked at me, strangely docile in a moment. In the light of later events, I realize that I had a psychic influence over Peter Kanarjian, that the mysterious power we call Fate had brought us together for a purpose. "What do you know about her?" he muttered.

"I have been talking to your uncle. Now let me talk to you—alone."

"All right," he said.

We returned to our table, and after a few words of explanation in Armenian which it was of no consequence to me to understand, Peter signed to me that he was ready and we left the coffee house together.

I had been doing some fast thinking. This man was a normal, realistic type and it would be foolish to unsettle his mind by attempting to describe the mystic aspects of the Buwalda affair, I concluded. Besides, they constituted Owen's and my secret until the investigation should be ended. He cared only about the way in which Coralie was affected, and it was on that basis that I must maneuver for his help.

"Mr. Kanarjian, I have certain knowledge that Buwalda is a dangerous rascal," I said. "He is not the religious crank your uncle believes him to be. He is a fortune-teller, a crook who gets control over women by befuddling their minds with card tricks and such things. His game must be stopped, but great caution should be used in dealing with him."

"You are from the Police?" asked Peter quietly.

"No. I am a member of a Society for Psychical Research. I am the friend of spiritualists who are seeking the truth, but a visit to one of Buwalda's seances convinced me that he is an evil-doer."

I handed Peter my card.

"From the point of view of my family, the Police should not hear of this matter," he answered. "But I trust you. Let us go to Buwalda's house and kill him."

The sheer primitiveness of the suggestion made me gasp. "We are not in Armenia," I reminded him.

"No matter where we find one, a Turk is always a Turk," he flashed back, the ghost of a smile in his eyes.

"But Buwalda is out of our reach, anyway. He moved from his house this morning. He is in hiding."

Peter stopped in his tracks on the Atlantic Avenue sidewalk. "So!" he exclaimed. "Is it possible that Coralie is with him?"

"Let us hope not," I hedged. "She has her husband's funeral to attend to. But you may be able to trace Buwalda through her. Are you on good terms with Coralie?"

"I love her," he replied simply. "She did not like that, and I have not seen her for two years. A cousin has some claims, all the same. She will see me now."

"Good. I want you to be very discreet, and if you find Buwalda to let me know without harming him.

His methods should be studied for the protection of humanity against others like him. But at the end he shall be punished. I promise you that."

Again, I think it was the play of my personality upon his that convinced him, rather than my arguments.

"We'll help each other," he agreed, "and you shall be the leader. I'll telephone you tomorrow."

Thereupon we clasped hands and parted.

Heavy lassitude settled upon me as I walked away from Peter Kanarjian. There had been too much excitement in the past eighteen hours, and I had had little sleep. For the moment, I was without a single inspiration as to my next move. So I bought the latest afternoon editions of half a dozen newspapers, and rode home in the subway to my flat on Fenimore Street.

I lounged in an armchair and read until dinnertime. The newspapers were full of the Griffin suicide, of course, but they told little that was significant to me.

This was a tragedy they continued to regard as picturesquely gruesome drama with never the hint of a crime. The valet who had been the last person to talk with Griffin before the latter left his house was given the one chance of his life to posture in a lengthy interview. The impressions of the two subway employees who had found the corpse were printed in full.

I smiled grimly to myself as I wondered how much red ink would have been plastered over the front pages, if the editors could have got hold of my story!

The details that held my attention were the bald facts about James Griffin's career and the property he had left. He had been an even richer man than I had supposed. His personal stake in the Wheat Exchange Bank, of which he had been President, had exceeded five million dollars. His holdings in steel, copper and traction stocks had been as much more. In addition to his town house, he had owned country estates on Long Island and in Florida. "A kingly plunder for Buwalda to annex, along with the widow!" I mused.

But, alas, I underestimated the mind reader when I credited him with suffering the delays that attend the probating of wills.

I had dinner alone, and might then have worked on the case before going to see Owen if I had not remembered an engagement with friends of my sister, Eleanor, who were giving a dance. The day before, I had been made happy by the news that a girl named Roberta Collins would be there. I had recently met Roberta Collins, and had felt sure I was falling in love with her. But the memory of her was vague to me now, and a dance given by the younger set seemed the most naive proposition in the world.

Nevertheless, I dutifully put on my tuxedo and went to the affair. I was an early arrival, because I intended to leave early. I helped to prepare the pink lemonade with the modest addition of bacardi that justified calling it a punch. As the girls came in, I flirted and laughed with them, and in the shelter of a potted palm I stole special kisses from Roberta. No one was more exuberant than I in demanding ever jazzier jazz from the orchestra. But my mind was far away. The same must be true, oftener than we dream, of the apparent pursuer of pleasure.

At eleven o'clock, I made a banal excuse to the hostess, slipped quietly to the cloak-room and was gone. Still in my evening attire, I took a taxi to Owen's apartment on Columbia Heights.

My brother scarcely wore the air of having been waiting up for me. His static face gave the impression that since he was never weary he consequently never slept. I found him bent over his large mahogany center table, making elaborate calculations which had to do with a chemical formula for an aniline dye.

"A job for the laboratory," he explained dryly. "I believe I am on the way to perfecting a new shade of purple." A stranger would have found it hard to believe that this glum scientist had ever spared a thought for the occult.

Owen gathered his papers and filed them meticulously in a cabinet. Then he stood up. He was dressed in his old claret-colored dressing gown, with a rope at the waist.

"What news?" he asked.

I described the incident at the Armenian coffee shop, stressing the impulse of friendship that had drawn me to Peter Kanarjian. Owen seemed neither to disapprove, nor to find the development weighty.

"That young fellow may be useful because of the blood tie. But be guarded in what you tell him," he said, and dismissed the matter.

He commenced to pace slowly about the room. His skin became more pallid and his eyes looked inward instead of out, if I may use inadequate words to describe my brother as I saw him. His calm was absolutely frigid.

"Have you ever taken part in a seance conducted by an adept, Hugh?" he asked finally. "Do you even have an idea of what happens when there is real power?"

"You yourself once put me into touch with the spirit of a dead sweetheart of mine. You spoke in her voice, and gave me her messages from beyond the tomb so lucidly that I knew her to be in the room, though I could not see her," I answered.

"True. But we did not challenge the forces of evil on that occasion, and they fortunately left us alone. I am asking you now whether you have seen the higher necromancy at work at a seance? Have you seen materializations of demons ? Or the furniture flying about the room, in defiance of the law of gravity?"

I shuddered. "I have known a tipping table under my hands to raise all four legs from the ground."

"That merely proves you to be a fair potential medium. Magnetism, my dear chap. I am sure the table rose only a few inches and immediately fell."

"You are quite right."

"I thought so. If you were to see anything really remarkable—er, tonight, for instance—would you fall into a panic?"

"I'd probably be frightened. But I'd go through with the seance," I vowed grimly.

"That's all I ask." Owen sat at the table and waved to me to do the same. He took out a little crystal ball, into which he gazed for a few minutes. Then he laid it aside and drummed with his finger-tips on the mahogany.

"The elaborate stage setting and incantations with which magicians start this sort of thing arc not of much help to an initiate," he commented. "The better one understands the subject, the less necessary is it to do anything except concentrate in absolute silence and summon the dwellers beyond the threshold. Knowledge—that is the key. But the presence of an inexperienced person like yourself forces me to cast a spell."

He went into the next room and returned with a green lacquered box. From this he took handfuls of a thick brown substance like mud, and strewed it on the floor in a ring that enclosed the table and both of us.

He then struck a match and applied it to the substance.

The latter instantly caught fire. A jet of thin flame about six inches high raced around the entire circle and quickly died down. I observed to my horror that the debris, which had turned ash-color, was composed of a network of tiny bones with clear spaces between the more prominent ones. A faint smoke drifted about the room, and brought to my nostrils an odor I had never smelled before. It suggested to me rotting roses mingled with ambergris.

"God only knows which of them will take advantage of this and come here tonight," muttered Owen cryptically.

I did not dare question him. My throat felt dry, and I gulped several times.

He reached for his crystal ball again and stared into it. But something he saw there caused him to lay it hastily aside and direct his eyes to the southeast corner of the room.

A Presence had taken shape in the dark angle formed by two bookcases. I could not at first tell what it was, for its outlines were blurred by a swirling mist that draped and re-draped itself upon the body.

But out of this mist there shortly stepped a nude woman, who advanced toward us with little mincing steps.

I confess myself baffled in the task of attempting to picture her. This was not a spirit as I understood the term, not an ectoplasmic wraith such as I had seen emerge from the cabinets of mediums. The creature had a body as finished, as solid apparently, as that of a mortal woman. The sole difference lay in the fact that the flesh was luminous and semi-transparent, like amber in a clear light.

It was an exquisitely beautiful body, but there was something wild and strange about the lovely, voluptuous face. The green eyes glowed with ardor—and reflected no more intelligence than those of an animal.

The half-parted lips suggested a wound. The bronzered hair was a tangled thicket of curls.

I cowered in my chair, wondering if I could behave with sanity should the Presence interest herself in me. But she was concerned only with Owen, who was sitting up very straight now and gazing back at her. She stepped delicately over the barrier of little charred bones, sat upon my brother's knees and twined her arms about his neck. As she kissed him soundlessly, the fingers of his right hand toyed with her hair. I could not see his face, but I lost no detail of her amorous quivering.

Stunned with amazement at the spectacle of austere Owen in such an embrace, I took refuge in the thought that it might be—must be—a hallucination. He had begun to speak, however, and his voice was cool and hard.

"I need your help tonight," he said. "It is of supreme importance that you should guard this room against intruders—you know whom—and allow me to summon the spirit of some dead human being. I wish to consult it about an earthly problem on which my happiness depends."

The Presence screamed a reply on a note so shrill that her voice was almost inaudible. It was the weirdest sound I had ever heard, and the word "scream"

is as close as I can come to defining it. Something similar can be extracted from an over-taut treble string of a musical instrument. The shrieking of bats also bears a resemblance to it. I did not begin to make out the actual phrases used by the Presence.

"That is very good," continued Owen. "I beg you now to leave me my freedom of action."

She stirred on his knees, stretching herself indolently like a cat. Plainly she was in no hurry to go.

But suddenly her voice rose in a new and more piercing screech, and at the same moment the windows opening on New York harbor were darkened.

A head and shoulders of awful portent loomed above the sill. The lower sash of a window slided upwards, God only knew how! and the monster swung itself into the room. It was fully as solid as the female Presence. But its body was covered with a mousegray fur, and it exhaled a reek of musk. The face was a distorted human mask, all nose and uncovered fangs and bony eye-sockets, and at no time did I trace the least flicker of an expression upon it.

I cried out in terror, but Owen swung around and silenced me with a rap of his knuckles on my mouth.

The Presence had leaped from his knees and thrown herself upon the other Thing, clawing and striking at it. They fought from end to end of the apartment, knocking over chairs and jolting vases and books from the shelves, yet keeping outside the ring of ash that enclosed us. The air was sibilant with their attenuated screaming.

With my mortal eyes—though there are moments nowadays when I turn materialist and doubt it—I saw the gray Thing chased back to the window and forced out into the void of the February sky. The victor then walked lightly about the room, her pagan features eternally smiling and vacant.

Owen paid no attention to her. For the third time, he held his little crystal globe cupped in both palms.

A faraway look came into his eyes and the lines in his face softened. He laid the globe aside and placed his finger-tips upon the table. I knew enough to do likewise without being directed.

The table began to pulse all over, and presently there came a succession of distinct raps at the very core of the wood, as if it had been hit from below by an unseen knuckle. This phenomenon is a sign of intense psychic activity and must not be confused by the reader with table tipping.

When the rapping ceased, Owen slumped in his chair and passed quickly into a hypnotic state, his head inclined upon one shoulder. He muttered to himself for a few minutes. Then, with the rational simplicity characteristic of messages from spirits on a high plane of afterworld existence, he spoke in a husky masculine voice that was decidedly not his own: "Buwalda is employing the law of telepathy, all right. He intends to misuse his power in a fearful manner. You two fellows are the very men to oppose him, because you have an instinctive defense system against his mind-reading. Certain other minds are also closed to him."

"What will his next move be?" I asked of the control. I regretted later that I did not employ the precious minutes to inquire further into the nature of Buwalda's secret. On the other hand, the question posed was important.

"He will set out to make himself fabulously rich,"

answered the voice that was using the tongue and lips of Owen. "Money is the short-cut to material power.

Look for Buwalda on Monday morning in Wall Street.

Copper—"

The message was violently interrupted, as Owen gasped and lurched against the table. His body grew rigid as if in death, and he slid from his chair to the floor. I stooped over him, half paralyzed myself with fear, but I found that his heart was beating.

After a little while, the color began to come back into his face.

I glanced about the room then, for the first time since my brother had placed himself en rapport with the spirit control. There was no longer a visitor to take into account. The female Presence had vanished.

The usual atmosphere of tranquillity had been restored to the place. I knew that the spell of sorcery was broken. Only the disordered furniture and the circle of charred bones remained to convince me that the entire performance had not been a dream.

"How much of a message did we get?" demanded Owen, as his eyelids flickered open.

I described what had happened. He arose painfully from the floor and resumed his seat before replying.

"It is better than nothing," he said. "I hope you begin to appreciate the dangers of tampering with the unseen. My control just now was attacked by a very powerful evil influence. My body was their battle ground. It nearly killed me."

Sinister as his assertion was, the curiosity that devoured me concerning the apparitions that had been in the room outweighed all else.

"For God's sake, Owen—-that woman, she was more than a ghost. What was she?"

"She was a materialization, in the most literal sense of the word. I assure you that the feel of her flesh and her hair could not be distinguished from that of a living being."

"Yes, but a materialization of what?"

He hesitated, pursing his lips. "She was a succubus," he said finally.

The bizarre name was like an insult to my credulity.

I was remotely aware that I had found it mentioned in books on demonology, without knowing exactly what it signified. "You—you are making fun of me,"

I stammered.

"Not at all. A succubus was generally believed in the Dark Ages to be a sort of female demon, which took human shape and tempted the devout into sin.

If the manifestation were in male form, it was called an incubus. Satan himself was, of course, supposed to be responsible. He could send one of his fiends, or he could come in person and appear to be male or female at will. That's what the Christian mystics said.

But more learned authorities held the incubi and succubi to be animal spirits, of the same tribe as the satyrs and nymphs of Greek mythology. The theory is that these earth spirits never leave our globe, yet are immortal without having gone through a material phase as we understand the term."

"You talk of 'authorities,' " I protested. "What scientific standing can such authorities have?"

Owen shrugged his shoulders. "I didn't know that the prejudices of modern men of science, who scoff at all mysticism, counted so heavily with you."

"They don't," I hastened to assure him. "I merely want to place your authorities in my own mind. Who are they?"

"Saint Augustine records that he encountered a succubus more than once. He writes that 'sylvans and fauns,' as he calls them, frequently have commerce with men, and that 'it were impudence to deny it.' Dom Dominic Schram, a mystic of a later date, says: 'It is certain that—whatever doubters may say—there exist such demons, incubi and succubi.' Paul Grilland, a French historian of sorcery in the sixteenth century tells categorically of a demon who assumed the form of a succubus. We also have the testimony of Sprenger, author of the Malleus Maleficarum, and that of many students of magic in the Middle Ages. Personally, I lean toward the belief that my visitor of this evening is an animal spirit."

"Something, perhaps, between mind and flesh," I muttered, aghast. "She may have the power to practice that 'throughth' we discussed only a few hours ago—the interpenetration of matter. When she makes herself invisible, she may be hiding at the heart of some more solid object. It would be no greater miracle than the passing of the tambourine through the screen by Daniel Buwalda."

"Ah, that is better! You show signs of developing into an occultist," said Owen, his eyes lighting up.

"But we are no nearer to knowing how throughth is performed. We shall often discuss it again. It is the supreme secret I hope to wring out of the Buwalda affair."

"What was that other creature who came in through the window tonight?" I asked.

"That was a demon, pure and simple," he answered coolly. "An evil spirit, not of this planet and hostile to mankind."

"You really believe in such monstrosities?" I gasped, my acceptance of his lore weakening again.

"Yes, and the chairs knocked over in the struggle between the succubus and the demon are still lying on the floor. I have witnessed scenes of the kind before.

How should I not believe?"

"And if the fight had been won by the—the demon?" I asked, gagging over the word.

"It would have been highly perilous to us."

"You thought nothing of risking the encounter?"

"On the contrary," he remarked dryly, "but the risk was necessary. I wanted to learn about Buwalda without delay, from an intelligent spirit. I threw the door to eternity wide open, so to speak, and any being was free to walk in upon us."

"Do you always have visitors of the sort?"

"No. Quite frequently nothing materializes at these seances. But they are always fraught with danger.

They are a challenge to the unknown—or shall I say, to the imperfectly understood!"

"I take it that demons seldom come, but the succubus does?" I persisted.

He nodded. "Just so. She is a familiar. She protects me."

"And who was it that finally started to give us a message?"

"The spirit of a brilliant lawyer I used to know, a fellow named Dickinson," replied Owen, as nonchalantly as if he had been referring to a man he had consulted in his office.

He covered his eyes with his hands.

"You had better run along home, Hugh. I must get some rest now. See if you can discover what Buwalda does in Wall Street on Monday, but don't disturb me until you have something important to tell."

The next day being Sunday, I was free to stay in bed, and it is a curious fact that, despite the nerve-racking session with Owen, I had never slept so soundly. At four in the afternoon, I was awakened by the ringing of the telephone. Peter Kanarjian was at the other end of the line.

"I have seen Coralie," he announced briefly.

"Were you able to get anything out of her concerning Buwalda?"

"No. Her house is a house of sorrow. I was obliged to be tactful. I tried to lead the conversation around to the Turk, but she would not mention him."

"What, then? I can feel, before you put it into words, that you are puzzled by something she said or did?" I asked.

"You are sensitive as a brother. That is good," he returned in a naive, pleased voice. "Shall I come to see you and tell you about Coralie?"

"By all means. Come right away."

In less than an hour, Peter was at my flat. He entered with the cat-like grace of the Oriental, and I noticed that his lips under his black mustache quivered in frank betrayal of the emotion that was tormenting him. Otherwise, his appearance was that of the average well-dressed young man, paying a Sunday afternoon call in Brooklyn.

We shook hands gravely, then killed several minutes in offering cigarettes to each other and lighting them.

"So you visited Coralie," I prompted him finally.

"Ah, yes! I must begin by repeating that I love her with all my heart."

"I am sure that you do. But what was it about her that puzzled you?"

"For one thing, she seemed to have no understanding of why her husband killed himself. I will admit to you, Mr. Purcell, that though I defend her name among the Armenians—" he threw out his arms dramatically— "James Griffin had reason to grieve over her conduct with Buwalda. She spent altogether too much of her time with the Turk. But Coralie docs not take that into account. She is heartbroken about her husband—absolutely heartbroken, I tell you—and she thinks it was simply a case of his losing his reason from overwork."

"It is surprising, but just as well that she should not suffer from useless remorse," I said, while Blinking to myself that Coralie Griffin must be an infernally good actress.

''I agree with you. There is another point, however.

A strange inconsistency. She has lost a certain trinket, the importance of which she greatly exaggerates. She breaks off suddenly in her mourning for Griffin, to cry out that she must get her jewel back. She goes so far as to make indiscreet admissions as to where and when she lost it."

"Indiscreet to what extent?" I asked softly. I recalled, of course, the gold brooch with an opal set in it which Owen and I had found in the house on Baltic Street. At the time I had figured that it belonged to Coralie, and Peter's story was decidedly interesting.

"She says it disappeared in Brooklyn the night of the suicide. She was supposed to be visiting relatives here, you know. Yet she begged me to inquire for it at the Ararat coffee shop, where I met you, and of the police and tradesmen along Court Street. It is not hard to guess that she was with Buwalda when she lost it."

"Why is she so attached to this trinket?"

"I do not know. A jeweler would give perhaps three hundred dollars for it. That scarcely seems enough of a treasure to share a woman's attention, with her husband lying in his coffin awaiting burial."

"Is it an heirloom?"

"Yes, from her mother's folks in Armenia. It is also said that a famous astrologer once owned the brooch in question, but before she was married she used to laugh at the idea that it might have magic powers."

"She did not know Buwalda at that time," I said to myself. Then, aloud: "How do you explain her present anxiety about the brooch?"

"She is under a malign influence. The Turk doubtless admired the brooch, and she is worried lest he scold her for having lost it. Yet it would not surprise me to learn that he had stolen it."

I remained silent for a few minutes. Here was an opportunity, I reflected, to prepare Peter's mind for the kind of help I might later want him to give me. But it would be necessary to understate matters, so as not to alarm him, or have him put me down as crazy.

"Peter," I said, using his given name for the first time, "she may have found that the trinket brought results at the seances she has been attending. Ancient objects do sometimes have the power to make the living see visions of the past."

"It may well be so, Hugh," he answered simply.

"But I understood you to say that Buwalda and his seances were fraudulent."

"Buwalda practices fraud when it suits him to do so," I corrected him. "But he is really a medium of sorts."

"I see. That makes him all the more dangerous to Coralie."

"Yes, and to society at large. I had a dream about him last night, Peter. I thought I saw him planning some crime among the banks and business offices in downtown New York. I could not make out just what he was up to, but the impression I got was so strong that I am going to investigate tomorrow."

The Armenian stared back at me curiously. "In my country we believe in the significance of dreams,"

he muttered. "You should follow up yours, for it was probably sent to you to help you to catch Buwalda."

"Would you like to join me in the hunt tomorrow?"

He stretched out his hand impulsively and gripped my shoulder. "Count on me. And I promise not to lose my head like a savage. I shall obey orders to the letter."

I felt qualms of conscience at the mild deception I had perpetrated on my friend. But it would have only mystified him, besides being a betrayal of Owen's confidence, if I had told him that my "dream" had actually been a spirit message received in unparalleled circumstances. I changed the subject now with Peter.

We talked about Armenia, and about my more innocent hobbies of tennis and boating. We had dinner together and went to a show. As the evening grew late, I suggested that he sleep in the spare room at my flat, and he accepted. I mention the fact to show how pally we had grown.

We left for the city in the morning somewhat ahead of my usual hour, and went straight to my office.

As I have already told the reader, I work for a firm of brokers. My duties are modest, bookkeeping for the most part. Occasionally, however, I represent my chief on the floor of the Stock Exchange. I have had the job for several years, and I enjoy privileges. No one would think of objecting, for instance, to my bringing in a friend to sit around and wait for me, and it excites no comment if I go on private errands during office hours.

That morning I was quite vague as to how I expected to get on the trail of Buwalda. When the latter performed his sensational coup, whatever that might be, the news would be spread abroad and I would be the only person to sense that the methods were his, I thought. I played with the easy notion that, by means of mind-reading, he could learn the combinations of the locks of treasure vaults, but I failed to take into account that he would then have to deal with armed guardians. Buwalda was subtler than I gave him credit for, too subtle to risk his life against bullets when there was no need to do so.

Transactions on the Street commence at ten o'clock.

At a quarter past ten, a clerk named Steiner who had been standing at the ticker strolled over to my desk.

"Amalgamated copper has taken a big boost this morning," he said: "It's selling like mad, and has already gone up five points."

My brain clicked warily at the word "copper." It Was the word on which the message of the control the night before had been cut short. Queer that copper Stocks should be the ones to create a stir so promptly.

I arose and went to the ticker.

To any one who is familiar with the tactics of the financiers, the ribbon of white paper covered with figures which glides endlessly into the basket below can be as dramatic as a Broadway thriller. The ebb and flow of vast speculations can be read there. It is possible even to detect the hand of some well known bull or bear, or to perceive that a new raider is attacking the market.

The reports already made it clear that the day was to be one of great activity. The feverish buying and selling of copper was more than a "flurry," as the newspapers call the little excitements that break loose on the Street from time to time. Transactions were running into the hundreds of thousands of dollars, with prices steadily rising. For the benefit of laymen, I'll say that this did not mean that stockholders were actually disposing of their shares to that extent. It implied heavy gambling on margins, and those who were betting on copper continuing to go up were making fortunes.

Presently, the contagion spread to other stocks. Stupendous deals in railroad, oil and steel securities were quoted. An odd feature was, that some of these were being played to rise and some to fall. A certain oil stock, for instance, was galloping downhill as crazily as copper had risen. A day when both bulls and bean are on a rampage brings the maximum of confusion to Wall Street.

The story told by the tape that came rippling from the ticker was melodrama on its own account. But to me it had a deeper, a more astounding, meaning.

An intuition concerning Buwalda had taken possession of my brain and would not be dislodged. Why should not he, the telepathist, the sorcerer, have tapped the minds of the money lords and discovered in advance the exact condition of all stocks that morning?

I asked myself. Such knowledge would have enabled him to launch the present campaign, safely and with complete legality. At that rate, he could make a billionaire of himself in a few hours. But how was he operating, and from what lair? Would it be possible for me to locate him?

I was trembling slightly as I turned from the ticker.

I put on my hat and coat, mumbled to the chief clerk that I was forced to go out, and dropped my hand on Peter's arm.

"Come along," I said with a mechanical smile. "I'm taking you down to the Stock Exchange to see some fun."

The narrow sidewalks of Wall and Broad Streets and Exchange Place were more congested than usual at that hour of the forenoon. There was an excitement in the air. The hurrying, jostling pedestrians seemed to know that an orgy of gold was under way, and to be eager to discover some manner of sharing in it.

But this was only a remote, faint wave of the turmoil that raged on the floor of the Exchange. It's a wild place at the best of times, but today it was like a battlefield of lunatics. Brokers' clerks, red-faced and screaming, brandished memorandums above their heads and bumped into each other as they tore here and there. Dignified financiers with seats on the Exchange wrangled bitterly in groups that were constantly shifting. Even the men at the blackboards had lost their poise, and shouted inaudible remarks as they chalked up the latest quotations.

I halted an acquaintance in his mad dash across the floor. "What's happening?" I demanded.

"It's a raid," he howled back. "Some combine is raising hell with the market. If it keeps up, there'll be a panic."

"Who's back of it?"

"I don't know. Wish to God I did. I'll bet J. P.

Morgan himself would give a million dollars for that information."

While it was true that the principal in a coup of this kind could remain strictly anonymous, I decided on reflection that the broker or brokers acting for him would have to work in the open. If Buwalda were responsible, he might be using several firms, but it should not be hard to get a line on the latter.

I selected one of the most prominent officials on the floor, made my way to him and spoke in a brisk, man-to-man tone which implied that he knew me well.

"Think of the bonanzas in brokers' commissions alone! I wonder what firms are cleaning up,"

"Don't you know?" he answered, scarcely glancing at me. "Practically all the big orders are being handled by Holcombe & Glick. That's what makes it so damn mysterious."

His few words provided me widi an invaluable clue. I felt it to be certain that Buwalda was operating through only one agent, after all. And in a flash I saw the reason for it. The arch-conspirator doubtless found it necessary to be on the spot and issue his orders from minute to minute as the prices of the different stocks fluctuated. He must obtain his private information telepathically and relay it to his broker by word of mouth. It was to be assumed that he was secluded at this moment in one of Holcombe & Glick's inner offices.

The firm was located on the eleventh floor of the Exchange Place Building. I made a bee line for it, though I was far from knowing what action I would take when I got there. Peter, looking bewildered, walked silently beside me. An explanation of some sort was due him.

"I have a tip that Buwalda is playing the stock market—dishonorably, of course, though within the law. I diink we shall find him at the offices to which we are going," I said.

"Ah, it is your dream coming true!" exclaimed the Armenian. "Can we expose Buwalda? Can we have him arrested?"

"I'm afraid not. I told you he was working within the law. My plan is to spy on him, and follow him to the place where»he is living, if possible."

"Good! Show me how I can help. I am ready to do anything you say."

On reaching the Exchange Place Building, which has entrances both in Exchange Place and Wall Street, we rode up in the elevator without noticing anything remarkable. But on the eleventh floor, it was at once apparent that we were nearing the headquarters of the war for the market's billions. The landing in front of the elevator was crowded with telegraph boys and special messengers. A clerk stood, obviously on guard, outside the door of the main office of Holcombe & Glick. He halted Peter and myself when we tried to pass him.

"Have you got an appointment?" he asked.

"No. But I want to buy some steel shares through your firm," I answered boldly.

"Very sorry. Our capacity is taxed for the present.

We can accept no new clients. If you care to return towards the end of the week, we shall be happy to talk business with you," he stated firmly but courteously.

I did not dispute the point, for it was plainly impossible to enter by that front door. Under the eyes of the clerk, Peter and I turned back to the elevator, but the latter had no sooner started to descend than I called the tenth floor. We emerged into a peaceful corridor, and Peter looked at me inquiringly.

"The role of detective—perhaps of housebreaker, too—is forced upon us," I told him. "I am convinced now that Buwalda is upstairs. We're going to climb the stairway and advance from the rear."

The stairs between floors in office buildings are seldom used, and we got back to the eleventh without being seen by any one. Holcombe & Glick occupied the front half of the floor. A passageway separated them from the offices to the rear, and all their doors that opened on this passage were lettered, "Private."

We stole along, testing the door-knobs gently. We found them to be locked, and as the panels of the doors were of frosted glass it was impossible to peep through them. A confused babel of unfamiliar voices reached us faintly.

When we came to the last door, however, the one next to the airshaft, I observed with interest that its panels were of clear glass and that a piece of tapestry had been hung on the inside to insure privacy. The room was at the far end of Holcombe & Glick's suite.

It had probably been intended as a storeroom, but it would now be the very place where Buwalda could keep himself inconspicuously. The tapestry, which was of good quality, suggested some such arrangement.

I tried the handle. It did not give way. The project of crawling on to the ledge over the airshaft and peering through the back window was weighed and rejected. The danger was too great. I did not doubt that if Buwalda should see me, he would hurl me down the shaft without compunction.

"There seems nothing for it but to hang around until the offices close and see if he leaves with the rest," I whispered to Peter.

"Yes, and if we listen by this door we may hear his voice."

It was a good suggestion. But though we kept our ears glued to the keyhole we could detect no sound except occasional footsteps and the opening and closing of a door. Several times we were compelled to straighten up and look natural, because the employees of other tenants had entered the passage.

Perhaps fifteen minutes later, it struck me that Peter was wearing a diamond ring and that diamonds would cut glass. The sound produced is a rasping one if the glass is dry, but the use of a little water practically eliminates it. I determined to attack the door, so sent Peter to fetch water from a washroom in a paper cup. Upon his return, I drew his ring across a lower corner of a panel of the door. The glass was thin. I cut through it quickly and then eased loose from the putty a triangular piece about two inches wide.

With the aid of a lead pencil, I cautiously shifted the tapestry aside and put my eye to the hole. I had hoped to see Buwalda in that room. I had almost reached the point of believing him to be there. But the sight that greeted me was a shock. The only person present at the moment was Coralie Griffin.

Swathed in widows' weeds, she sat in an armchair and smoked a cigarette. There were lines of grief in her soft, plump face. Her eyelids drooped over her indolent eyes. To all appearances, she had not a thought in her head. She was waiting, waiting in her submissive way until it should please her lord to take her home. She had come with Buwalda, of course.

But why had he brought her there? How had they dared to make a semi-public visit to a business office on a day she should have devoted to the preparations for her husband's funeral?

Peter meanwhile was crouching at my elbow and, naturally, quivering with eagerness for his turn to peer through the hole. I hated to give him the chance.

It would inevitably hurt him to learn that Coralie was so ready to follow the medium's whims.

"Hold on a bit," I muttered. "I can't quite make out what's happening."

At that instant, a door swung open and Buwalda entered the room into which I was staring. He had on his hat and overcoat, and carried a heavy walking stick. Bending over Coralie, he said something in a low voice. She arose promptly, and they started for the door.

I leaped erect, aware that the most rapid action was necessary.

"Buwalda is on the way out," I hissed to Peter.

"We must get down to the lobby of the building and watch for him by the elevators. Then we may get a chance to trail him, unseen. It would be fatal for him to catch us on this floor."

Peter nodded, and we started down the passage. I was ahead. I believed we had a good chance to get to the elevator before Buwalda did.

But suddenly my coat was roughly seized from behind, and a vicious snarl assailed my ears. I swung around in astonishment. Peter, his face contorted with fury, his eyes blazing, was bearing down wildly upon me.

"For God's sake! Peter! What is the matter?" I cried.

He was too insane with rage to give me a direct answer. "Brigand! Turk!" he screamed, as his powerful hands closed about my throat and he hurled me to the floor.

IN my amazement at Peter's brusque and treacherous attack, I had made only a feeble gesture of defence, and in a moment it had become too late successfully to protect myself. His fingers tightened on my windpipe, and my clutching at his forearms had no more effect than if I had tried to tear the branches of a great tree loose from its trunk.

A black cloud swam before my eyes. I was at the point of being throttled to death.

"Peter—Peter—my friend! You are mad!" I strangled brokenly.

Perhaps I lost consciousness. I do not know. But my next sensation was one of exaggerated relief. The hands had been taken from my throat. My blood was circulating freely once more. I sat up, blinking and gasping. A number of persons had come to the doors of offices, but Peter waved them away from us. He stooped towards me, anguished remorse stamped deeply upon his features.

"Forgive me. A terrible thing happened," he muttered. "I will explain."

I staggered to my feet. An especially officious clerk from Holcombe & Glick's was speaking to me: "What the devil has been going on here? Were you assaulted ?" An intuitive confidence in Peter, despite appearances, dictated my answer.

"It was just a fainting spell. I'm all right now," I said briefly.

Taking the Armenian by the arm, I leaned on him for support until we reached the elevator. Enough time had passed, I knew, for Buwalda to have escaped us. The all-important quest must be again postponed.

In the lobby of the building, we found a stone bench in a quiet corner, and I faced Peter with a touch of frenzy.

"What in God's name possessed you to do such a thing?"

"You're going to think I'm a stark staring lunatic,"

he began, clamping bodi palms over his temples with Oriental vehemence, and gazing miserably at me.

"But it is the truth—the truth—that when I leaped upon you I would have taken an oath upon my mother's grave that you were Daniel Buwalda."

A prickly sensation stirred along my spine. I already saw the drift of his bewitchment. "Give me more details," I urged gently. "At what moment did the illusion start? How did it pass off?"

"Well, you said for us to go downstairs, and you walked ahead, you remember. I thought I heard something funny, and I glanced over my shoulder. Then I looked back at you—and you were Buwalda. Everything about you had changed. Your clothes, your walk, were his. I cried out, and the face that you turned to me was absolutely the face of the Turk. I did not stop to diink what had .become of the real you. In my rage, I only knew that I wanted to kill.

You see now what a worthless brute I am. I had promised you that if we met Buwalda I would hold my hand. And I commit such a madness as this! I am ashamed."

"Don't take it so hard, Peter. What else happened?"

"You called to me, and it was the voice of Buwalda that I heard. But only at first. While I was choking you, you cried out again and again. The sounds grew different. You said, 'Peter—my friend!' and suddenly I knew who it was I was about to murder. The eyes and mouth of Buwalda faded away and I saw your face. Imagine, if you are able to do so, how I hated myself!"

His explanation made clear to me the sinister force that had been at work. It was a manifestation of the identical deviltry that had caused James Griffin to cut his throat. First a telepathic contact and then mind control on the part of the formidable medium. Griffin had been made to see his wife in the arms of a phantom lover, so why should I doubt that Peter Kanarjian had had the illusion he described? He had been used to strike at me, and the objective had been murder.

But how to hint as much to a man whose notions of the occult were nodiing if not naive?

"It was all part of the risk we faced in this investigation. You are not to blame," I said.

"But I am, Hugh, I am. It stands to reason that no one else can be to blame."

"You are wrong, and you must not torment yourself. I have learned something new today. I'll tell you about it, this evening, when we have the time. Keep a level head in the meantime, and believe that I trust you."

He gave me a dumb, obedient look, his brown eyes swimming with gratitude. The more definitely to change the subject, I arose and led the way out of the building. The soreness in my neck had pretty well gone, though I afterwards found that I bore black-and-blue marks.

Wall and Broad Streets had become raging torrents of excitement, scarcely less hysterical than the Stock Exchange itself, during the hour or so we had been indoors. The newspapers had issued extras, which were being bought with an eagerness not paralleled since the days of the World War. Headlines in letters two inches deep shouted an ominous pronouncement in the faces of the crowd: BILLION DOLLAR RAID SHAKES MARKET and subdtles and the text below them repeated with innumerable variations the menacing word, PANIC.

It was no false alarm. I snatched a paper from a newsboy and scanned the front page. Dozens of the smaller brokerage firms had overreached themselves and collapsed. Their bankruptcy would involve millions of dollars in bad debts. Copper and certain other stocks had been forced to fantastic artificial values, and the actual holders were beginning to sell out for cash to deluded speculators who would be ruined when the inevitable let-down occurred. Of such stuff are financial panics made.

But dominating all else, from my point of view, was the hasty estimate of the experts that some one unknown gambler on margins had benefited by perhaps $1,000,000,000. He was the instigator of the raid, the cause of the general disaster that threatened. The Street had never seen a coup like his. Wild rumors concerning his identity were abroad, but Holcombe & Glick guarded his secret well. The name of Daniel Buwalda was not once mentioned.

Peter walked back with me to my office. I said good-by to him there. He was to call at my flat after dinner, we agreed.

My firm was not on the list of those that had been drawn into the slaughter of the morning, though I discovered that my chief had personally added quite a sum to his fortune by trailing along with the winner and stopping in time. I realized, startled, that I could have done the same thing and have become a comparatively rich man without running the slightest risk.

But I did not regret my failure to do so. It is against my principles to seek to profit financially from my adventures in spiritualism.

Routine work proved to be a terrible burden that afternoon. But I struggled through with it, and at four o'clock I rushed home to Fenimore Street. My first act was to call my brother Owen on the telephone.

"You have seen the papers? You get the significance of what happened downtown today?" I cried.

"Certainly. It is what I expected," he answered coolly. "Now be careful how you express yourself to me over a public wire."

"I located the business headquarters from which our enemy was working."

"Yes. Go on."

"I saw him. I thought I'd be able to follow him to his home. But—"

And I proceeded to give Owen a succinct account of the hallucination undergone by Peter and its deplorable results to me. A few cryptic words thrown in here and there were enough to confuse possible eavesdroppers, but I knew that my brother understood. He made no comment until I had finished.

"It's a development of the greatest interest," he said then. "The fellow apparently can practice his black art under any material conditions. Hm! That tells me all I need to know for the present. You and I won't have to meet today. Continue your investigation, and report again."

"But, Owen," I protested, "you are ignoring the problem of Peter Kanarjian. His friendship for me is sincere, and he can be very useful. I can't go on keeping him in the dark about how things really stand.

Don't you think you're the one to open his eyes to— to our theories?"

"No," he snapped, after a brief silence. "I give you permission to talk spiritualism to him. Nothing too deep, you understand, that would bewilder him. Take him along with you as far as you had gone without my help. Impress him. Cement his confidence. But I forbid you even to mention my name."

It seemed an arbitrary restriction to me, but there is no disputing Owen when his mind is made up. I turned my thoughts to the details of the best course to follow in explaining myself to the Armenian.

He arrived at nine o'clock, his air a curious mixture of diffidence arising from his inability to believe.

I had quite forgiven him, and of morbid preoccupation with his own love tragedy. I had decided to stage a simple seance for his enlightenment. It would be anticlimax to me, I feared, after Owen's display of power. Yet it was destined, as the reader will see, to have a most singular upshot.

"Buwalda is a magician, Peter," I said bluntly, after our talk had played around the edges of the subject for a few minutes.

The hand that held his cigarette trembled, and his eyes evaded mine. "That is a strange word to hear spoken in New York," he muttered.

"Perhaps. But everything connected with Buwalda is strange. Recent events have persuaded me that he is even more dangerous than I had dreamed at first.

Think of the incredible thing, for instance, that happened between us today. Buwalda was within a stone's throw of us, beyond the partition. He seems to have known that we were hunting him down. So he made you see what you saw. He cast a spell upon you."

I lacked the heart to tell Peter that Coralie Griffin also had brushed by us on the other side of the wall.

"Ah, a spell!" he exclaimed wildly. "I used to hear talk of the kind when I was a boy in Armenia. Old Kurdish women sit in caves in the mountains and Work evil upon our people, so it is said. But I never thought to experience the sorcery that could make the face of a friend alter to that of a foe. For God's sake, how was it done?"

''I do not know precisely. Buwalda is a spiritualist.

I've already told you that. I've gone in for psychic research myself, and I'd be the last to deny that any evil is impossible when a bad man succeeds in putting himself in touch with the immaterial world. Peter, do Tou believe in an after life?"

"We Armenians are Christians," he asserted proudly. "Of course, I believe in the immortality of the soul."

"Have you ever tried to communicate with a departed spirit?"

"Never. I would have considered it a sin."

"It is not a sin, if one's motives are pure. Will you let me show you how it may be done? We are leagued together to fight Buwalda, and after you've shared my knowledge we'll both be the stronger for it."

He turned pale, then threw out his hand and gripped mine. "Anything that you say is all right, I will do."

I got out my talking table, rested my finger-tips lightly upon it and told Peter to imitate me.

"This is a means of concentrating and of giving the dead an instrument through which they may send messages," I elucidated in A.B.C. terms. "If a person with mediumistic power—I have it, to some extent— is present, a control usually takes possession of him, A force I'll call magnetism for want of a better word flows from the medium to the others in the circle. The table quivers under their hands, raises itself upon two legs and raps upon the floor. It will answer questions.

The code is, one rap for No, two for Doubtful and three for Yes. The table will also spell out messages by rapping once for the letter A, twice for B and so on.

You understand, of course, that all such manifestations originate with the control."

Peter nodded, and we both remained silent for nearly a quarter of an hour. But though the table stirred now and then, there was no sign that it intended to develop real action. I began to suspect that my friend was one of those rare non-psychic individuals whose participation throws a damper upon a seance. Most persons are merely neutral, and arc ignored by the control.

The hitch was especially awkward in this case, for I had as good as promised results to Peter. I held on for a while longer, and then said: "Please take your hands off the table. Let's see what it will do for me alone."

He obeyed, pursing his lips and putting his head on one side.

In less than ten seconds, the table commenced to bounce up and down and give every sign of being eager to talk. I asked whether there was a message for Peter. The answer was, "No." A message for me, then? "Yes." Did it concern my pursuit of Buwalda?

"Yes." Would the control spell out the message?

"Yes."

Thereupon, by means of the slow process of running through the letters of the alphabet, the table rapped out the following: "I will send her to you."

This was puzzling, and I demanded details. The table simply repeated, "I will send her to you " and had reached a third "I will send—" when I drew my hands away.

"You must know that feeble-minded, erratic spirits often cut in on these sessions. One is never sure of getting a clear message," I said apologetically to Peter.

He did not reply for a moment. "I don't want to be critical, Hugh," he observed at last, "but, after all, you, or any one else, sitting alone at a table, could manipulate it into saying anything. Is there a reason why I shouldn't try it alone?"

"None whatsoever," I answered quietly. "But you won't get results. You are not mediumistic."

"We'll see." He assumed the regulation pose. Naturally, the table would not stir for him. He laughed.

I had found exhibitions of skepticism amusing is other people, but it was vitally important to me not to lose Peter's confidence. "Listen, old fellow," I said earnestly, "I am not trying to deceive you, and that much can be proved in no time."

I again placed my hands on the table. It resumed its antics, and I allowed it to work up a great deal of energy without putting a question to it. I then removed my left hand, and raised finger after finger of my right until only the index finger was still touching the wood. But, as I knew would be the case, the tabic continued to vibrate.

"What is the message you wish to give me?" I asked.

It rolled sideways on two legs. A little laboriously, yet with precision, it rapped out: "I will send her to you"

"There you are," I addressed Peter. "You can't think I am able to juggle a heavy table with the tip of one finger."

An awed look had spread over his countenance.

"God, no!" he mumbled. "You—you must excuse me. I didn't really doubt you, but this sort of thing is new to me."

"Do you suppose I fail to make allowances? Don't worry, Peter. Tonight, the only message seems to be a mysterious promise that isn't going to be fulfilled.

Whoever 'she' may be, she doesn't come to the table, and the joke is on us. Let's change the subject."

"All right. But tell me one thing. Do you believe that Buwalda is helped by the spirits of the dead to perform his magic?"

"Something like that. I haven't got to the bottom of his method. We'll go into the matter more fully, later."

We lighted fresh cigarettes and settled ourselves comfortably in armchairs. But though we tried to make small talk about books and travel, I could not shake off a sense of uneasiness and I was aware that Peter was affected in a similar way. It had started to snow. I fell to watching the great fluffy flakes that drifted against the window-pane and immediately melted. Our conversation languished. An almost sinister silence reigned in the room.

Suddenly this was broken by a light knocking at the door.

I started and glanced at Peter. "I'm not expecting a caller," I said under my breath, without knowing why I made such a point of the information.

"N-no?" he commented nervously.

I crossed over to the door and threw it open. There was a small, slim girl waiting on the landing. Her hat and her coat with its cheap fur collar were speckled with snowflakes. She stared straight ahead of her, her wide-open eyes and pinched face as blank as those of a sleep walker.

Her features were vaguely familiar to me. Where had I seen her before ? I could not be sure, and in my surprise words with which to question her were.

lacking. i She walked past me into the room, mechanically swerving a few inches from her course to avoid bump- : ing into Peter, and came to a rigid halt by the fireplace.

"Oh, Lord! More horrors!" I whispered. "The girl is hypnotized."

"Who is she?" asked Peter.

I answered him at the instant that a tardy recognition of her flashed upon my consciousness: "She is Buwalda's secretary. She is the girl who used to take tickets at the seances on Baltic Street."

The potentialities of this weird occurrence were not lost upon the Armenian, though he was far from guessing that Owen and I had made it part of our strategy to locate the very girl who now stood silently in my flat.

"Buwalda's secretary has been sent to us?" he queried, his jaws sagging.

"It would seem so. The table promised to send a woman. I thought some new spirit control was meant. But, instead—we get this."

"Should we talk so frankly in her presence?"

"It doesn't matter. She's asleep on her feet, and afterwards won't remember what was said. But right now she'll tell the naked truth in reply to direct questions. The state is one of hypnosis."

"Who hypnotized her?"

"God knows!"

I approached the pathetic visitor and studied her, amazed in spite of my lore at her death-like detachment from the waking world.

"What is your name?" I asked gently.

"Anna Wagner," came back in metallic, clipped syllables, at odd variance with her manner of a gray mouse on the occasion of our first meeting.

"Where do you live?"

"One hundred and eleven Sackett Street, Brooklyn."

"Who was that man you worked for on Baltic Street?"

"Professor Buwalda."

"Where is he now?"

"I do not know. He has deserted me."

"Deserted you, Anna? Do you mean simply that his going has left you out of a job?"

"I mean more. I love him, and he swore that he loved me. He was to be very rich some day, he said, and then he was to take me to live with him in a fine apartment in New York. It was a lie. He has gone away without leaving even a letter of good-by for me."

"Did you give all—give yourself to him?" I boggled, convinced that it was important I should know the depths of Buwalda's treachery.

"I gave all. I loved him."

Turning to Peter, I raised one eyebrow and shrugged my shoulders, as much as to say that he must take what comfort he could from the knowledge that Coralie was not the only woman who had fallen under the influence of the medium. It was on the tip of my tongue to question Anna about Coralie. I hesitated because I feared it would hurt his feelings. But in this matter the Armenian proved to be more realistic than I.

His face contorted with grief, he stepped forward and addressed the girl: "You had a rival, did you not?"

"Ah, the woman in the furs—the lazy, dark woman!" replied Anna slowly. "She has made me cry, but I was a fool to care. It is she who is mad about the professor. He does not love her. He loves no one, I think."

Peter's chin sank on to his breast. He was too stricken to press the matter further. I spoke again: "Anna, why did you come here?"

"I was sent," she stated gravely.

"Who sent you?"

"A strange man. He came to my room and sat and talked to me for a few minutes, and told me where to go. I did not know his name, but he was a nice man and I did what he told me."

"Can you describe his appearance to me, Anna?"

"Well, he was tall and—and handsome, though he was not so young a man," she faltered. "You—you should go to his funeral."

As she uttered these blood-curdling words, her muscles swiftly stiffened, her mouth fell open and her eyes rolled over in their sockets. She swayed, and would have toppled to the floor if I had not guided her to a couch, where I laid her out on her back.

Peter had followed us, trembling.

"Is she dead?" he gasped.

"No danger of that. The hypnotic condition is wearing off. I can bring her back to normal in a little while."

"Who was the man she described? Wh-what did she mean about going to a funeral?"

"Can't you guess, Peter? A tall, middle-aged man, and obviously connected with this mystery, since he sent her to us! She must have been visited by the ghost of James Griffin."

"Holy Mother of God!" He made the sign of the cross. "This girl was hypnotized by a specter, you say?"

"So we must assume, though it is outside accepted theories on the subject. Perhaps she was self-hypnotized, and the ghost then found it possible to control her."

"But was it Griffin who spoke to us through the table, who made us the pledge that she would come?"

"There can be little doubt of that," I answered.

"Why did he not name himself?"

"I cannot tell you. I only know that whenever I have been in touch at seances with the spirits of the newly dead they have been erratic and limited in their freedom of expression."

A weariness had settled upon me. I wanted to be free for a while from the necessity of answering Peter's questions. There was so much in this new development that I wished to mull over in my own mind, without interruptions. I swung brusquely around to the girl.

"I am going to awaken her," I said. "Then I want you to take her home in a cab. Make friends with her on the way, and get her to promise that one or both of us may visit her soon. Will you do that?"

"But of course I will," replied Peter.

I stroked Anna's pale forehead until her features relaxed, and her breathing became soft and regular.

As soon as I thought it safe to do so, I spoke in a dear, authoritative tone: "You will awaken in exactly one minute's time.

But if in the future, I should want you to return to this state, your mind will be submissive to mine. Remember that. Now, in one minute—awaken!"

She stirred on the couch, sighed and opened her eyes. Her condition was that of an ordinary sleeper who had just been aroused. She gazed blankly about her, experienced swift astonishment at her strange surroundings, and sat up with a cry: "Who are you men? Where am I?"

"We have been taking care of you," I assured her gently. "You were wandering about the streets, and entered this building. I drink you must have been ill.

You were in a sort of coma. My name is Purcell, and you are in my flat. Mr. Kanarjian here is a friend of mine."

"I was wandering about the streets!" she repeated, staggered. "I didn't know what I was doing? Such a thing never happened to me before."

"There's no reason to be scared, because you're all right now. What is your last waking memory?"

"Why, I was at home! I'd been reading on a settee, and I must have fallen asleep. I don't recall a thing after that."

"Luckily, it's turned out to be a harmless adventure," I smiled. "Mr. Kanarjian will escort you home, if you'll let him, Miss Wagner. You've already given us your address as well as your name, so you see your coma couldn't have been a very deep one."

She made a helpless little gesture with both hands, moved vaguely about the room, and solemnly said good-night to me and started for the door. Peter swung into step beside her.

"You will come back here?" I called after him.

"Certainly, Hugh," he answered.

Left to myself, I mused on the intricacies of this Buwalda affair, which each new event rendered a darker mystery for all concerned. The terrible mind reader had known that Peter and I were on his trail in the Exchange Place Building, though I had been assured that I had a perfect defense system against the telepathy practiced by him. Doubtless, it was Peter's mind that he had read. Should I, in that case, regard the Armenian as a vulnerable assistant, a peril to myself in the enterprise? But it might be that Peter's introduction tonight to the rudiments of occultism would close his mind, also, to Buwalda's machinations. Time alone would tell.

It was clear that everyday persons were victims and unconscious tools of the medium. In all logic, it should be easier still for him to influence those who knew him personally and admired him. Why, then, had he allowed Anna Wagner to be drawn into my sphere?

I could only figure that he had totally discounted the importance of Anna, that he had forgotten the drab little girl as soon as she had ceased to be of material service to him. If that were so, it was a sign of inefficiency. A superman would have discounted no one from his past life. There might be chinks in Buwalda's armor—a thought that lent hope of success to our fight against him.

As to the role which had suddenly been played by the spirit of James Griffin, I confess that the circumstances numbed me with a fright I could not define.

It had been so furtive a spirit! Was it, too, in the shadowland beyond the grave, obliged to take the fearsome powers of Buwalda into account? Why had it spoken through Anna, hurriedly, as an after-thought, to say that I should attend the funeral of its mortal body?

I was sunk in the contemplation of these problems when Peter returned.

"Miss Wagner has ended up by feeling quite grateful to us," he announced. "She invites either or both of us to call to see her at any time."

"Good. The next lead for us to follow is the Griffin funeral. When is it to take place?"

"At eleven, tomorrow morning."

"Had you planned to attend it?"

"Naturally. I am a relative,"

"A way must be found for me to go. Do you have a car?"

"Yes—a sedan."

"Allow me to drive you to the funeral. I can wear a false mustache, and pose as being a chauffeur."

"Don't you think it would be rather odd for me to appear in my own car? There will be a seat for me in one of the big family cars."

"You can claim that you are forced to leave from, the cemetery on a trip out of town, and want to have your sedan handy. Ride out in the place assigned to you among the mourners, but give me the necessary excuse for trailing along. It is important that I witness this funeral from beginning to end."

"Very well," said Peter. "I'll call for you at nine o'clock tomorrow."

I was glad that he was ready to go home, for I was absurdly tired. I had no sooner crawled into bed than I was sound asleep.

Upon opening my eyes at half-past eight the next morning, I was astonished at the profound darkness that lay upon the room. Surely the clock must be wrong, I thought. But when I reached the window, I perceived that the city had been clutched by a black fog of the kind that occasionally occurs in New York toward the end of the winter. It was impossible to see across the street. A murky yellow filtering from above furnished the only sign that somewhere in the world day had broken. This was a "pea's soup"

fog, though it was not thick enough to halt traffic, as happens only too often in London.

I could not help wondering whether the funeral would be held as scheduled. It seemed a sinister day on which to send forth the final solemn cortege of a loved one. The psychological effect upon the mourners would be horribly depressing. I found myself shuddering with repugnance as I gazed into the wet darkness and pictured a long, slow journey with an open grave at the end of it.

Nevertheless, at ten o'clock Peter arrived, his face of a waxen pallor and his eyes troubled.

"The weather is ghastly, but there's to be no postponement," he said. "I telephoned, to make sure. We must start at once."

I put on a baggy overcoat and a soft hat which came down over my eyes. A neat black mustache which I had worn to masquerade balls completed my disguise. I felt it was not likely I would have to meet the test of talking face to face with any one who knew me.

Downstairs, I took my place without comment behind the wheel and set out to make the best time I could to the city. It was a difficult and perilous trip.

The stifling dankness that accompanies a fog caught at my throat. The asphalt over which we glided was slippery, almost greasy, and the comparatively few cars that were out hindered our progress by their excessive caution, rather than otherwise. A driver ahead would slow up suddenly, in fear of an obstacle real or imaginary, and time and again I escaped from a rear-end collision only by blind luck. On the Manhattan Bridge, the imminent dangers of skidding were doubled by the lurching, prowling tempo of the machines which felt their way across the great span.

The illusion was that of voyaging in an aeroplane through a cloudy sky, for though we knew that the river lay below, the water was invisible, and the very arches of the bridge were lost in the sombre mist.

I succeeded in making my way within the hour to the Griffin home on West 72nd Street. The spectacle there was nodring less than fantastic. A huge motor hearse stood squarely in front of the steps, and strung out behind it were dark cars in which some of the mourners were already seated. The fog pressed down upon them like a pall, while plumes of yellowish murk eddied and swirled close to the roadway. The facade of the house, set back from the street, was indistinguishable. It might or might not have been the imitation French chateau I had seen in my vision at Buwalda's seance, for all I could have told on this day of gloom.

I drove up level with the hearse and let Peter get out. Then I retired and took my station at the far end of the line. No one paid the slightest attention to me. In a few minutes, the cars began to creep forward. Funeral processions are trying on the nerves under ordinary conditions, but the snail's pace at which this one fumbled through the fog was a cruel and gruesome ordeal. I did not even know to which cemetery we were bound. Presently, I could tell by the route we took that it must be Woodlawn, which meant a journey of some ten miles. We should be doing very well if we got there by three in the afternoon.

Actually, it was three-thirty when we turned into the gates of the cemetery, and the fog had not lifted.

I followed the other cars to a plot where the tombs were not thickly clustered. Immediately beyond, I thought I could make out the silhouettes of trees. I was among the first to descend, and after locking my car I pressed to the outer edge of the circle of mourners that was forming around James Griffin's grave.

What did I expect to see? I would have found it impossible to answer that question, though my life had depended on it. I saw a casket borne forward slowly, reverently. But it scarcely seemed important in the investigation on which I had embarked. I did not doubt that the casket contained the body of the man who had come to his death as the result of murder by suggestion. That mortal frame was no longer significant. The funeral itself was a mere ceremony. Within easy reach of me stood the widow, Coralie, conspicuous because of her flowing weeds.

She was sobbing, a handkerchief held to her mouth.

I could not locate Peter, and the other mourners were strangers to me.

Feeling half ashamed of my role of interloper, I obeyed an impulse and withdrew some ten yards into the fog. The party about the grave was blotted out, but I could hear the voice of the clergyman starting to intone the commitment of "dust to dust and ashes to ashes." I shivered. Then suddenly I caught sight of a tall figure of a man approaching me obliquely, as if he had circled the grave. I was astonished at the silence with which he moved and the vagueness of his outline. But the mist, I knew, could play strange tricks.

The man walked by me without speaking. He gestured with his arm, as if signaling to me to follow him. Naturally enough, I hesitated to obey, since my own presence in the cemetery was irregular. I was bothered also by the feeling that I had seen this man before, in painful circumstances the memory of which I hated to face.

He moved closer, but his head was down and I could make nothing of his features. It was an odd fact that it did not occur to me to address him in words, to ask his name. I simply waited, and presently in desperation he raised his head. I found myself staring, as I had stared once before in an empty subway car, at the green-pale countenance and anguished eyes of James Griffin.

This time, however, it was the ghost of the tragic suicide. I was less frightened than I would have believed possible. Perhaps Anna Wagner's adventure the night before had prepared me for this. So though I trembled all over, I returned the phantom's gaze steadily, and when he turned away beckoning to me, I fell into step behind him.

He led me down a graveled pathway to a spot to the right of where the funeral was being held. Two small private chapels which served as entrances to vaults stood close together there. The party returning from the Griffin grave would have to pass within a few feet of the spot. I observed nothing unusual, but the fog made all observations uncertain, and, the next thing I knew, the ghost had disappeared. Apparently, it had entered the narrow space between the two chapels. I advanced with gingerly steps, hugged the wall of the nearest structure and peered around it.

A stark surprise awaited me. Daniel Buwalda stood there, his back towards me, his head twisted about on one shoulder so that I could see his profile. He was staring through a gap between two bulky tombs, staring into the fog in the direction of the funeral, yet keeping an eye upon the way of approach that I had taken.

Directly in front of Buwalda, and crowding him closely, was the specter. But I was stunned to perceive that the latter was invisible to Buwalda. The terrible phantom face could not have been ignored by even the most cold-hearted criminal, as Buwalda was ignoring it. His eyes were separated by inches from the eyes of the ghost. I was forced to conclude that the medium, despite his formidable powers in other directions, was not gifted with second sight.

The shadow-self of Griffin was appealing now to me. It signed furiously for me to attack Buwalda, and as I hesitated it raised both its hands, the fingers crooked, and clutched at the throat of the living man.

There was no mistaking the meaning. I was being told to kill Buwalda. It would have been possible for me to commit the deed at that moment, with little fear of discovery. He did not know of my presence. I had the strength to overcome him. God knows, it might have been better for myself and the rest of the world if I had done it! But I had no stomach for murder. I shook my head.

My feet must have kicked around in the gravel, for there was a scraping sound, and the medium turned and looked directly at me. His eyes dilated and his jaws fell open. Obviously, he recognized me. I reflected wrathfully that I probably had a fight on my hands, anyway. But Buwalda harbored no such idea.

Instead, he let out a hoarse cry and bolted through the far opening between the chapels.

Scarcely realizing why I did so, I rushed in pursuit of him. I saw his grotesque figure bounding over low tombs, doubling on its tracks to evade taller ones.

His arms flapped in the fog like those of a scarecrow.

He seemed more of an evil wraith than the ghost that had led me to him. His speed was superior to mine.

I knew he was getting away from me. Yet I continued the chase until I could hear his flying foot-steps no longer. I realized then that I had only succeeded in losing myself in the miasmic and abnormally darkened cemetery.

When I at last found my way back to the scene of the funeral, the little car I had driven out was the sole one standing there. Peter, sitting at the wheel, wore a distressed air as he argued with two Woodlawn employees. I took in the situation rapidly. I had locked the sedan and put the key in my pocket, and it had been up to Peter to explain why he could not leave with the rest of the homeward-bound mourners. Remorsefully, I hurried forward.

"I'm the chauffeur," I explained. "I—I felt ill, and I sat on one of those tombs. I guess I must have fallen asleep."

It was a lame excuse, but seeing that I produced the key and Peter did not disown me, the attendants were willing enough to accept it and let us depart.

Making no pretense of taking the wheel from my friend, I slipped into the back seat and we started away. He looked at me sideways.

"Where did you go, Hugh?" he asked. "I can tell from your face that you ran into something weird —some new slant on our mystery, I suppose. God, the whole thing is driving me mad! Did you notice Coralie's condition? She's a wreck."

I deliberately refrained from answering him for several minutes. Then, in a quiet tone, avoiding sensational words as much as possible, I began by giving him an account of how James Grifhn's spirit had appeared before me and led me to the place where Buwalda was lurking, of our mutual recognition and his amazing flight.

When Peter tried to make a comment, I hushed him by raising my hand. I proceeded to tell him all that I had been holding back, everything that had happened to me, with the single exception of the seance conducted by my brother Owen. I did not feel I had the right to mention Owen, since the latter had forbidden it. But I described the passing of the tambourine through the screen, and the motion pictures that had resulted in my own brain. I told of the death of Griffin, of my second visit to Baltic Street and the finding of the opal brooch. Though it took courage to do so, I let him know that Coralie had been with Buwalda in the stock broker's offices on Exchange Place.

My fear had been that the hot-blooded Armenian would be moved to an insane anger by these revelations, and so become useless to me. But Peter was pierced to more sombre depths. An expression of awe seemed to fix itself upon his face like a mask. "What docs it all mean?" he muttered.

"That Buwalda practices magic. I admitted as much to you last night. I cannot say how he practices it.

1 am trying to find out—for the protection of Coralie Griffin, and you, and myself, and every one in the world."

"Would it not be simpler to kill him, as you had the chance to do just now?"

"It is easy to say that. But you will observe that, by one means or another, he escapes from dangerous situations. Besides, it is our duty to try to penetrate his secret."

He bowed his head. "Do you suppose I could meet Coralie socially?" I asked, after a while. "She is evidently important in Buwalda's scheme of things, and I want to study her at first hand. I'd take a chance on her not remembering me from the seance on Baltic Street."

"It can be arranged, Hugh," he answered gently.

"She is to come to tea tomorow at our uncle Stefan's, in the strictest family intimacy. She wants to get away from the atmosphere of her house of death.

I will find an excuse for taking you to the tea."

"Is your uncle Stefan the old gentleman who introduced me to you at the Ararat coffee shop?"

"The same. Four charming granddaughters live with him. You will enjoy meeting them."

We found little more to say to each other on the journey back to Brooklyn. I was possessed by gloomy forebodings, and Peter appeared to be in the same stall of mind. Yet a sense of trustful friendship, which did not need to be expressed in words, made itself felt between us.

At Borough Hall, I asked to be set down and continued on foot towards Columbia Heights. I was taking a chance on finding Owen at home. Night had fallen, and although the fog had thinned somewhat, the streets were darker than usual. The corner lamps resembled great yellow glowworms veiled by shifting gauze.

I pushed the bell of Owen's apartment, and an instant later an answering click assured me that I had not made the trip in vain. My brother leaned over the railing of the top landing to see who was coming, but after his glum fashion he gave me no greeting until he had closed his door behind me. Then he nodded, smiling almost imperceptibly, and placed a second chair at his center table. He had been just about to have supper. I perceived that I was invited to join him, and I sat down to an ascetic's meal if ever there was one. Owen is a person who believes that dried figs, biscuits and a few leaves of lettuce constitute a fine repast. He seldom eats meat. Yet when he is suffering from overwork I have seen him drink strong tea to excess, and he habitually smokes too many cigarettes. On the material plane, he has his inconsistencies, like the rest of us.

As I started to nibble at one of his figs, he asked curtly: "The news?"

It struck me that my middle position between Peter and Owen was singular and far from comfortable.

With the Armenian, I was the leader, the psychic initiate, the one depended upon to solve all knotty problems. But as soon as I found myself in Owen's company, my role was reversed. I knew him to be a great adept, and his wisdom gave me a feeling of inferiority.

To a considerable degree, he intimidated me. I feared to hear him say I had blundered.

However, I took a grip on my faltering ego and gave him a full report on everything that had occurred since we had last seen each other. It was his first chance at the details of Buwalda's activities downtown, for I had been forced to omit much when talking to him on the telephone. Anna Wagner's hypnotic trance and my adventure at the funeral were wholly new to him.

He listened silently until I had finished, then threw himself back in his chair and fiddled with the fingers of one hand at his up-pointed chin.

"According to that theory of throughth I advanced the other day," he said at last, "Buwalda, in the bad office on Exchange Place, must have been causing solid objects to penetrate each other, as a necessary accompaniment of his mind reading and mind control, Coralie doubtless was his passive assistant, as at his seances. The conditions were perfect, for he was able to get his information about the stocks, and he created a deadly hallucination in the brain of your friend Peter. At the cemetery, on the other hand, he was impotent. He ran like a rabbit. There is nothing to indicate why that should have been so."

"Perhaps he cannot work without an assistant."

"That might be a weighty argument," answered Owen drily, "if you and I had not seen him apparently pass unaided dirough a truck, the morning we searched the house on Baltic Street."

"I give it up," I mumbled, abashed.

"But I don't, my dear boy. I collate the evidence, and sooner or later I expect to grasp the logic of seeming contradictions."

"Why do you suppose Buwalda was hanging around the funeral, anyway?"

"It looks as if that might have been the simplest, the most normal, act of his that we have on record. He knew himself to be a murderer, and he could not keep away from the last rites. Now, regarding Anna Wagner's visit to you. I think you have analyzed it correctly.

Buwalda dropped her out of his plans. He blundered h doing so. We can probably learn a lot about his habits from that girl, not to mention the fact that the has become a medium ready to our hands. I hope Griffin's spirit continues to communicate through her.

ft refuses to have anything to do with me."

"You have tried to get a message from Griffin's spirit?" I demanded, startled.

Owen yawned. "But of course! I'd hardly overlook as promising a lead as that one. I looked into my crystal globe, and tried automatic writing. The results were nil. Ghosts come or do not come, as they choose, in answer to such feeble calls."

"Surely a seance like the one you held with me—"

"Thank you!" he interrupted brusquely. "But I can't afford to repeat that kind of seance very often.

The danger is too great. I reserve my strength for one more during this investigation. Meanwhile, I am going to experiment along easier lines—some other night, when I feel in the mood—with Coralie's brooch on the table."

He drew from his waistcoat pocket the opal and gold trinket we had picked up in the dismantled rooms of the medium, appraised it quizzically and returned it to his pocket.

"Why with the brooch on the table?" I asked.

"An object with which a departed soul was familiar in its lifetime serves as a magnet to draw it into a circle like ours. Surely you know that. It is a common-place."

"Coralie greatly values the brooch, according to Peter Kanarjian," I commented.

"I am not surprised. She may find it helpful in her mystic performances with Buwalda. It is an ancient jewel, and the setting has astrological significance, as I mentioned before. Possibly, the old sorcerer who made it sees fit to return to earth when it is used to call him. I may attempt to summon him myself."

"Talking about Coralie, what do you think of my plan to meet her at her uncle's home tomorrow?"

"I approve. The lady impresses me—at second hand —as being quite stupid in everyday matters. She'll likely fail to recognize you, if you change your appearance a bit. But I warn you, Hugh, your life becomes more definitely at stake with each new step of the sort. Buwalda knows you are after him. He'll be keeping his eye upon Coralie and every one who sees her. He'll not hesitate to kill you at the first chance."

I shuddered. "All the same, I shall go."

Owen arose and prowled the room restlessly. "I've had a damnable headache since I got out of bed this morning," he said. "Let's take a walk."

"It's a miserable night for walking."

"Oh, I don't mind fog! Rather like it, in fact."

Without consulting me further, he entered his bedroom and changed his old wine-colored dressing gown for a gray tweed suit. He put on an extremely baggy raglan overcoat and a crumpled cloth hat, and selected a gnarled stick from the rack.

"I like fog," he repeated absent-mindedly.

We stepped out on to Columbia Heights to find the streets deserted beyond their wont, and the section is at no time a busy one. Policemen are rare objects, because crimes are rare on the Heights. The oldfashioned residents slip in and out of their houses with a self-effacing air. There are no movie theaters and few shops to strike a note of modern life in the Nineteenth Century quietude of that part of Brooklyn.

On the night in question, we did not meet a single pedestrian as we strolled towards Montague Street.

A light breeze was blowing, and the pall of fog had commenced to stir. A pronounced change in the weather was imminent, but it was still dank, oppressive. The nostrils palpitated as one breathed the thickened atmosphere.

At the Penny Bridge, Owen and I turned west to the observation platform built over the end of Montague Street, which at that point dips sharply down to an abandoned ferry. Ordinarily, the harbor and the skyscrapers of lower Manhattan are visible from the platform. We might as well have been standing, now, upon a mountain peak wrapped in clouds.

"We don't seem to be in New York. It's a fascinating effect—'' I began.

A sudden shuffling of feet behind us caused me to interrupt myself. Owen and I turned at the same moment, to see four huge, vague figures bearing down upon us. Their right arms were raised, which enhanced the illusion of their height. No sounds came from their lips, as they speeded their ominous advance.

Amazingly, coming from him, Owen uttered one shout that must have been heard for blocks. "Thugs!

Help!" he roared. Then, swinging his stick like a club, he rushed to meet the attack.

I was right behind him, but two of the men cut me off, while the others tackled him. I knew it to be a hopeless fight, unless help came to us. But I struck out for all I was worth. My fist connected with a jaw and my opponent went down. He was given the time to recover as his confederate wrestled me to the edge of the platform, and I again had both of them to deal with.

I could spare only occasional glances at Owen. He had established an early advantage, for he had lamed the arm of one man with his stick. But when I looked again, I saw him being severely buffeted. He lurched sideways and fell, and both his assailants piled upon his prostrate body.

"This is the end of us!" I thought. Then a police whistle sounded shrilly through the fog. It produced an instant effect upon the thugs. Without striking another blow, they hissed incomprehensible signals to one another and scattered in different directions. They had disappeared a full minute before two bluecoats came blundering down upon us.

Owen had gotten to his feet and leaned, panting, against a railing. He had appeared unable to answer me when I asked him whether he had been hurt, but upon the arrival of the patrolmen he mastered himself with an effort and spoke steadily enough.

"Footpads assaulted us," he said. "Luckily, no harm's done. You got here in time."

"You were knocked down, huh?" an officer barked.

"Yes, but I'm all right."

"Anything stolen off you?"

"Nothing whatsoever."

While one of the men took our names and addresses, the other started in vain pursuit of the thugs.

Then the second policeman also vanished.

"Owen, is it true that you lost nothing?" I asked, a premonition tingling in my brain.

"It is not true," he answered calmly. He reached for a cigarette and lighted it. "Coralie Griffin's brooch was stolen. I think it was the main object of this attack.

The moment I was down, the fellow on top of me reached into my waistcoat pocket for the brooch, as if he had known from the beginning that it was there."

The morning after our nerve-shaking battle in the fog, I awoke to find gay sunshine streaming through the windows. I lay flat on my back for several minutes, my eyelids blinking in the revivifying light, my mind toying vaguely with the happenings of the past five days. I felt rested, and I enjoyed the luxurious indolence of a half-aroused sleeper whose health is good.

Upon climbing out of bed, I followed my customary routine of lighting the gas under the coffee percolator, jetting out my breakfast things and shaving. Then I fetched the newspaper from the landing and glanced over it while the coffee bubbled.

The echoes of the sensational raid on Wall Street Were still worth a front-page article. Danger of a money panic, however, seemed to have been averted.

The mysterious unknown had gotten away with a huge sum. It could scarcely have been the round billion of dollars that the headlines proclaimed, but it had run to scores of millions. The Stock Exchange was licking the considerable wound that that implied. But big bankers had come to the aid of the market. I knew as much myself, and was not interested to read farther.

A natural curiosity led me to search out the brief account of the Griffin funeral. It was phrased in conventional language, and consisted mostly of a list of prominent names. I also looked to see whether the attack upon Owen and myself had been mentioned in the notes on crime, but it had not appeared to the reporters to be worthy of a single line.

The principal story of the day, however, was vastly interesting for its own sake. The Mayor of New York City had given rise to the fear that his mind was unbalanced.

At five o'clock the preceding afternoon, he had summoned the representatives of the press and handed them carbon copies of a letter in which he had summarily removed from office the Police Commissioner, Michael O'Hara. He had thereupon announced the appointment of a certain Henry W. Shaw to the vacant post. The act would in any event have been startling, for Mayor Carter and O'Hara had been working in complete harmony, and the last-named was regarded as the best Police Commissioner in twenty years. So violent a political upset was not without precedent. The secret demands of a party boss can destroy the ties of personal friendship and trust. Anything can happen in politics.

But there were points about the present coup which bewildered the public and made Mayor Carter seem little short of a lunatic. The appointee, Shaw, was utterly unknown. He was a middle-aged lawyer from the Bronx, who had never succeeded in building up a practice that would more than pay his living expenses. My paper asserted that it had not been able to find that his name had ever before been printed in a news story. Certainly, he had shown no capacity for executive work and was not an authority on police problems.

Shaw's obscurity was bad enough, but the Mayor had added to the calamity by giving out a hysterical interview. Pounding on his desk and glaring at the reporters, he had shouted: "The new Police Commissioner is going to prove the salvation of New York City. No, the appointment was not made as the result of pull. Henry W. Shaw came to see me this morning. It was the first time I had laid eyes on him, or even heard his name. But he sat down and in less than an hour he outlined to me the most marvelous program for combating crime to which I had ever listened. He showed me wherein the old methods were wrong. He analyzed perfectly the psychology of the crook, and then did as much for that of the policeman. His is a colossal brain, a master will. He'll know how to stamp out the hold-up men and the gamblers. I count the opportunity to place him in office the most fortunate event of my administration."

In another column, there was printed a statement by the acknowledged leader of Mayor Carter's party.

"The organization repudiates all responsibility for the change at Police Headquarters," this powerful individual announced bluntly.

I read all these details, because they were sufficiently bizarre to have human appeal. But politics ordinarily are no concern of mine. Shrugging my shoulders helplessly at the folly of the Mayor, I at last laid the paper aside and went to my breakfast.

The day before, I had stayed away from my office on the excuse of having a sore throat. But I knew that if I wanted to hold my job, as well as do justice to the investigating of Buwalda, I would have to make some definite adjustment of my time. I reported for work at the regular hour, put in half a day and then applied to my chief for a week's leave. I was on the edge of a nervous breakdown, I said with more truth than I perhaps realized, and on this plea the concession was granted. My immediate gain was freedom to attend the tea at the Kanarjians, where I expected to meet Coralie Griffin.

I telephoned to Peter. He answered in his quietest manner that the way had been smoothed. The chief difficulty had been to convince his uncle that it was justifiable to present me under a false name. But the family horror of Buwalda's influence over Coralie had turned the scales.

"I told Uncle Stefan that you were our only hope of getting the Turk behind prison bars, without causing a scandal that would involve our name," he said. "Expect me at your apartment at four o'clock, to take you to the tea."

"O.K.," I replied, and started for home, so as to have plenty of time to prepare myself. I should have liked to squeeze in an hour for a visit to Anna Wagner, the medium's pathetic ex-secretary, but this was impossible.

Standing before the mirror to figure out some manner of disguise, I perceived once more, as I had on several occasions of late, that the amateur has a hard time of it when he sets out to play the detective. The false mustache which I had worn the day before was discarded as a matter of course. Eventually, by dint of much fussing and experimenting, I succeeded in bringing about a slight change in my appearance. This was due chiefly to the trimming of my rather bushy eyebrows. A make-up pencil, sparingly used at the corners of my mouth and under my eyes, completed the illusion. It earned a smile of approval from Peter, when h; arrived.

He seemed more light-hearted than he had been, but it was necessary to let him know that Coralie's brooch had been taken by unknown robbers. I described the adventure of the evening before, though I modified it to the extent of implying that I had been alone when assaulted. In a moment, his face darkened again.

"Violence at every turn! God!" he muttered. "I tell you, Hugh, this affair won't see its finish until the devil behind it all is killed."

He drove me swiftly to the downtown section of Brooklyn. On Pacific Street, he pointed to a new apartment building.

"That's where I live," he remarked.

I realized then, with a start, that in the fantastic confusion of events since I had met him, I had never asked him for his address, though he had given me his telephone number. It was a fine illustration of ray inexperience as a sleuth.

Two blocks farther down, on Henry Street near Pacific, we stopped in front of a handsome brownstone house, typical of the residences of rich Armenians in the neighborhood. A man servant of nondescript nationality answered the bell. He was probably a halfbreed Turk from Asia Minor. Members of my host's race dearly love to employ a person with even a modicum of Turkish blood in a menial position. The vengeance for the centuries of oppression they have suffered may be trivial, but vengeance it is.

Peter and I were shown into a front parlor too crowded with ornate furniture and costly rugs. The patriarch of the Ararat coffee shop, his huge white mustaches looking like tusks in the half light, arose to erect us. He extended his hand to me with a flowery gesture. "Welcome, sir." Then, without waiting for me to reply: "Your enquiry has shown you, has it not, that my niece is guilty of no wrong, except the indiscretion of knowing Buwalda?"

"Why, of course, Mr. Kanarjian. That is all it amounts to," I answered with a bow, though I smiled inwardly.

"Good. I now give myself the honor of having you meet my granddaughters. Mrs. Griffin has not yet tome, but we await her at any moment."

He clapped his hands, and in response to the oldworld signal the connecting doors between the front and back parlors were thrown open by the servant.

Four young girls whose ages varied between sixteen and twenty-one advanced with a fluttering and blurred cooing, as of doves. They were the girls I had seen on my first visit to the coffee shop. And they were very beautiful, very charming girls, I have no doubt. It was my loss that I could not for the life of me give them the attention they deserved, though I appeared to do so. My ears were straining to note the earliest hint of Coralie's arrival. Perhaps I feared that she would not come at all. It would not be surprising if Buwaldt ?

penetrated my scheme and halted her at the last ; minute.

When the door bell rang, I repressed a jump, lighted one of Kanarjian's admirable Levantine cigarettes and stood up as Coralie Griffin rustled into the room.

She was in black, and was cuddled in the folds of 2 fur coat of surpassing luxury. Her widow's veil was pinned back from her face, the full contours of which were more soft and lovely than on the previous occasions when I had crossed her path. Grief had wholly disappeared from that voluptuous mouth and those melting but shallow eyes.

She hesitated by the doorway and looked faintly astonished at seeing a stranger. But Peter was already at her side and had taken her hand in his.

"How are you, dear?" he said, his love vibrating in the wistful tones of his voice. "I hope you won't mind my having brought an old friend with me this afternoon. He's Frank Marshall, who was at Cornell with me. Haven't seen him for years. I ran into him on the street just now, and I hated to let go of him.

"You did quite right, Peter. I am charmed to know Mr. Marshall," replied Coralie, in honeyed accents.

She turned her gaze full upon me, and thereby mused me not a little trepidation. But her amiable smile, the general emptiness of her face, convinced me that if she had ever looked at me before it had been with unseeing eyes. She extended her hand graciously.

The palm was softer than satin, almost too soft, and again found myself wondering what in Heaven's name this harem woman was doing in the toils of a practitioner of black magic, like Daniel Buwalda.

Her limp sensuality was precisely what one would not took for in a medium's assistant. And if the tie between them were solely one of the flesh, how incongruous a pair they made! She a spoiled daughter of wealth, and he a shabby-appearing mystic with the mark of the beast stamped deeply upon a triangular jaw that Lombroso would have liked to study.

These thoughts were passing through my mind as Coralie removed her fur coat. I then perceived with a quiver of amazement that she was wearing on her right shoulder the opal and gold brooch which had been filched in such unceremonious fashion from Owen's pocket. The jewel, to be sure, was her property, and I had assumed that the attack upon us had been for the purpose of restoring it to her. But there was something weird about her displaying it so soon, to me of all people. I wished I dared question her about it.

Peter came to my rescue. "Ah, the brooch! Yog have got it back. I am glad," he said, with just the right touch of interest in his voice. It would have taken a cleverer person than Coralie to guess that he had heard anything about it from- a third party.

She cupped her hand over the trinket with an acquisitive gesture. "A rough-looking man brought it to me this morning. He'd found it on Court Street, and a jeweler in the block told him I'd been enquiring for it. He wouldn't take more than five dollars as a reward. Haven't I been lucky?"

Mind reading may or may not have had anything to do with it, but I was certain that Coralie lied. There could have been no need for a messenger and a rigmarole story between herself and Buwalda.

She was now giving all her attention to me. "Come here, you nice man, and let's sit in this cozy corner,"

she purred. "You must tell me all about yourself. If you went to Cornell, you're probably an engineer. I'm sure you've had a wonderful, adventurous life in wild countries."

I played up to her as best I could, romancing might* ily about a career far removed from spiritualism. I hoped for no more than to gain her confidence, to be invited to visit her at the Griffin home in New York. In the meantime, the chance to study her personality was precious. But I was not prepared for the turn she gave to affairs before many minutes had dipped by.

After accounting for Peter and her other relatives with a few airy nothings, she nestled in a deep armchair in the corner she had chosen and had me shift my own seat until I had practically cut her off from the rest of the room. When tea was served, she had our cups and cake plates put on a little tabouret which filled the space between her knees and mine, and over which her hands discovered a reason to hover whenever mine were outstretched. Our fingers touched more than once.

She talked incessantly in her rich, low voice, and rarely expressed anything that could be called an idea.

But her eyes were eloquent—her large, moist eyes of an emotional animal—and her mouth gave the constant impression of wanting to be kissed.

"What's the object of all this?" I asked myself.

"Why is she vamping me? Is she more cunning than I thought? Does she know perfectly well who I am, and is she trying to trap me into making some dangerous admission ?"

It was soon clear, however, that the woman had no motive beyond the primitive one of arousing my senses while catering to her own. Her ankles touched mine under the tabouret, and failed to move aside. Thrilled?

according to herself, by an inanity I had uttered, her hand fluttered to my arm, and stayed there.

A terrible embarrassment took possession of me. I felt like a ridiculous modern Joseph in the clutches of Potiphar's wife. It seemed that Peter's jealous eyes must be boring into my back. This Coralie was obviously unbalanced on the subject of sex. She wanted to have love made to her by any man she found halfway attractive. But the scandal of her conduct on the very day after she had buried a husband would rest equally upon my head, I feared, in the minds of her Armenian kin.

I contemplated getting to my feet with an excuse of no matter what kind, and addressing myself to old Stefan Kanarjian. But she was talking so steadily, so softly, that it did not appear possible to move. I shut my ears, then, against the things she was saying, and fell to marveling afresh that a psychic could have found her useful. When Buwalda desired to pass tambourines through screens, this amorous babbler was the person who stood ready to receive them. Extraordinary !

Both my hands were at that moment in my lap, hidden by the tabouret. I held a teaspoon in one and a napkin crumpled into a ball in the other. Obeying a vague impulse, and for want of something better to do, I pressed the spoon against the napkin. The latter offered no resistance whatsoever. I glanced down, thunderstruck, to see the bowl of the spoon emerging from the far side of the tightly crushed ball of linen.

Simultaneously, I experienced a painless jolt in my brain, and a swift series of pictures in motion flashed across my inner vision. I saw Buwalda prowling about a vast unfurnished room, in the middle of which were piled tables, chairs and divans, their legs still ini the straw wrappings employed by dealers. He was considering the furniture in leisurely fashion, but suddenly he stiffened, swung around on his heel and seemed to be staring directly at me.

I had whipped my hands apart. The act was involuntary and deplorable, for I had everything to gain by testing the phenomenon. The latter ceased the instant the spoon was drawn free of the napkin. I had had an adventure which closely paralleled my introduction to "throughth" at the seance on Baltic Street.

But it was merely the prologue to events of more sinister import.

When I raised my eyes to those of Coralie Griffin, it was to find that she had gone deathly pale. Her mouth was drooping open and her whole body was trembling. She got to her feet unsteadily.

"I—I feel ill," she stammered, addressing the company at large. "I want to go upstairs—alone—please."

Peter sprang to her side, but she waved him away and stepped into the hall. I was left without an excuse to attempt to halt her or to ask for an explanation. On the other hand, Stefan Kanarjian strode over to me.

"You offended my niece—yes?" he demanded "What did you say to her?"

"Nothing that could have made her angry. Nothing, sir, I assure you."

His thick, white eyebrows were drawn together and his lips were stern under the flowing mustache. "We shall see about that when she returns," he growled.

The four granddaughters had crowded together by the mantel piece like frightened birds. Peter's face was a tormented mask, and whether he held me to blame I could not guess.

"Probably, Mrs. Griffin's heart—" I began.

I was interrupted by the heavy slamming of the front door. Instead of going upstairs, she had left the house. It was a case of precipitate flight—from what? "

I could not answer the question, but my instinct was to follow her and try to force matters to a crisis.

"Peter, will you come with me?" I cried.

He fell into step loyally beside me, and together wc dashed to the street.

We reached the sidewalk, to see Coralie already half way down the block, scurrying along on foot. She had come in a car, of course, but the Kanarjian home stood opposite the Long Island College Hospital and parking space in the street was limited. Her chauffeur had gone elsewhere, doubtless with orders to return for her at a later hour.

Peter and I glanced at each other. "It's natural for me to ask her what's wrong," he panted. "She can't resent that. Let's catch up with her."

We broke into a run, but the lead she had on us Was enough to bring her to the Amity Street corner first. Then a curious thing happened. A policeman who had been standing on the curb thrust himself between us and the fleeing woman. He was scowling fiercely, and he fingered his nightstick.

"Hey, there, you bums!" he snarled. "She don't Want to talk to you. This is a one way for you to get pinched, the both of you."

"Were within our rights, Officer," said Peter, "She's my cousin."

"Your cousin! Ha, ha! That's a good one!" the cop roared. I realized to my dismay that it was logical for him to look upon us as footpads or mashers, but there was a wild light in his eye, a sneer on his lips, which I could not account for.

Peter drew out a card. "Here's my name and address. My uncle lives at Number 600 Henry Street, in this block. We were all visiting at his house. My cousin left in a temper over nothing, and I wanted to make up with her, that's all."

"You're crazy as hell. That lady is the wife of the Governor of the State," declared the policeman angrily.

On the heels of this astounding assertion, he clutched Peter by the collar and shook him like a pup.

He grabbed at me, but I dodged successfully.

"Beat it back where you belong, before I run you in," he yelled.

Coralie by this time was out of sight. We had turned toward the Kanarjian home, but the apparently insane cop continued to shoo us along, jeering inarticulately.

"Keep on going," I said under my breath to Peter.

"We mustn't drag your uncle into this."

Nothing further was said until we reached Atlantic Avenue.

"The Governor's wife!" my companion muttered then, in dazed tones. "Coralie's actions with you, and now this! Is the world going mad?"

I had ready a reply which would have given him much food for thought, but my attention was distracted by the signs of a growing confusion that prevailed on the avenue. The Armenian shops were more crowded than usual, and the customers were less concerned with making purchases than with arguing some turning question that led them to gesticulate in each Other's faces. The passersby were in desperate haste.

Many of them carried newspapers, which they read as they walked. From the direction of Court Street, the clamor of newsboys calling extras came to my ears in a persistent staccato.

A premonition of new evils caused my heart to sink, as I took Peter's arm and guided him toward the center of excitement.

We found the streets about Borough Hall Square jammed with citizens, whose state of hysteria could only be ascribed to the threat of a public calamity.

The reason was not far to seek. Headlines blacker and more exclamatory than those which had recorded the recent financial coup on Wall Street, now told of grim happenings in the city that day. There had been two outstanding tragedies. I can still conjure up a mental picture of the first "screamer" that caught my eye: MARINES SLAY AND LOOT ON BROADWAY I snatched a paper from the nearest newsboy, and backed into the doorway of an office building, where.

I was partly sheltered from the jostling mobs while I glanced over a report that was substantially as follows: A squad of United States marines from the Brooklyn Navy Yard, commanded by a lieutenant, had attended the unveiling of the bust of a naval hero on Riverside Drive. At three in the afternoon, the ceremony over, they had marched down 86th Street to take the subway. Upon reaching Broadway, the men had suddenly broken formation and attacked the nearest stores, smashing the windows and plundering the contents. They had shot their lieutenant and all their petty officers when the latter had tried to restore order. Ten civilians and two marines had been killed in the general fracas that followed. It had taken a riot call for the policemen from four station houses to subdue and arrest the survivors of the squad.

"I don't know what got hold of us," a marine had declared later, in an amazing confession. "I guess I'll be set down as a hop-head or worse, but I swear to God that I was struck all of a heap with the idea we were on duty in some Central American town, and that the natives needed a lesson. I thought I'd heard an order to rough-house them, in retaliation for sniping. When the lieutenant and the non-coms started to yell at us, I saw them as Chinamen. Don't ask me why I mixed up Chinks and Central America. I'm looney, I guess."

Meticulously, but with trembling hands, I folded the newspaper, turned it over and read the second story that was agitating New York. It was less obviously sensational, yet the menace to the community was darker because more far-reaching.

At exactly three forty-five P.M., the electricians at the main power houses of the Telephone Company had gone on strike. Improvised leaders had demanded double pay for all employees. They had made the grotesque statement that the President of the Company had promised them this increase. Brusquely rebuffed, the leaders had ordered the men to wreck the system, and had been obeyed. It was a vicious case of sabotage.

A few exchanges were functioning with the new dial instruments, but generally speaking the city's telephone service had been cut off at a blow.

"This is a fine opportunity for Mayor Carter's prize Police Commissioner, Shaw, to demonstrate his worth.

We know of no other Masked Marvel who has been given such a chance on his first day in office. Disorder is rampant in our midst. We look to Shaw to suppress it masterfully," the paper commented with savage irony.

I passed my hand across my forehead. The connection between the Mayor's strange appointment of Shaw and these later events, the massacre by the marines and the telephone strike, were at last clear to me. Even the behavior of the policeman who had taken Coralie for the Governor's wife must be counted as a minor manifestation of the plot. Daniel Buwalda, the man who could control minds because he could read them, was responsible for everything. But why, why, I asked myself in desperation, should he have perpetrated a series of incoherent and seemingly useless crimes? It suggested a mania for cruelty, more apelike than human.

There were telephone booths in the lobby of the building where I stood. On the slim hope of being able to reach Owen, I entered one of them and dropped a nickel in the slot. But the receiver I placed against my ear was soundless, dead. The local exchange was among those which had been put out of commission.

I felt that I must see Owen without delay. What to do with Peter, however, was a problem. I could not abandon him in this crisis, when his life had probably been declared forfeit by Buwalda. My brother would have to accept the necessity of meeting him, sooner or later. It might as well be now, I decided. Yet Owen's incognito should be maintained.

"Peter, I'm going to take you to the house of a very great spiritualist, but I cannot tell you his name. I've promised not to mention it to any one," I said bluntly.

"Why should we go there? I'd rather we searched for Coralie. She may need protection." As he faced me, his eyes and mouth were moody.

"Coralie has been snatched far out of our reach for the present. Don't you realize that, old fellow?" I answered more gently. "She didn't go of her own free will. Buwalda summoned her. The magician is much too strong for you and me. So we'll ask help of a real psychic, and—well, I want you to promise to abide by whatever he says or does."

Peter clasped my hand silently. Behind the quick submissiveness he was always ready to give me, I could sense a smoldering wrath which nothing could stop from bursting into flame, I knew, should he ever meet his arch enemy man to man.

We plunged into the crowd and elbowed our way to the corner of Remsen Street, where we turned west. Progress became easier, though the sidewalks of the ordinarily tranquil Heights were thick with frightened people in the gathering dusk. The newsboys had started to shout a fresh crop of extras.

"Judge Murdered in Court Room by Lunatic!" they bawled.

It was an indication of my state of mind that I would not pause to learn the details of this latest horror. One judge more or less no longer appeared to be of consequence.

At Owen's house, I rang the bell, asked Peter to remain downstairs and hurried to the top floor. My brother was waiting for me on the landing.

"You have brought the Armenian with you," he stated calmly.

"Yes. It was the only thing to do. I will explain.

But how did you guess it?"

"I never guess. It was a probability, since you were together this afternoon when hell broke loose. Be* sides, I sent you a telepathic message to bring him."

"You did, Owen? I was not conscious of it."

"Yet you obeyed. I also repeated the warning that my name must be kept from him."

"It registered."

"Good. We have there an example of simple telepathy, such as has been observed for centuries but has never been controlled. I've tried to reach you a dozen times, and have never succeeded before today. Hm!

It's scarcely important. Buwalda's method is the one worth knowing. Now tell me what happened at your tea. Make it brief. We can't hold the Armenian downstairs much longer."

"I met Coralie Griffin, all right—" I began. In a few minutes I had recited my story.

Owen's features had been growing harder as he listened to me.

"You passed one solid through another—you!" he exclaimed fiercely. "You had that chance, and failed to get an inkling of how it came about! God, I should have been there!"

"Jibing at me won't get us anywhere," I said wearily. "Have you no answer to the riddle? No theory?"

"I—have—none—as—yet," he replied, spacing out his words with bitter emphasis.

"Could it be that Coralie's brooch is the source of power?"

"Anything is possible. I've admitted to you that it might be a factor. But I shan't figure upon a onehundred-per-cent magic brooch until its reality is forced upon me."

"Do you agree that Buwalda cut in on my session with Coralie, and ordered her away from me?"

"Certainly."

"And the public crimes of the past twenty-four hours?"

"Oh, all that stuff—of course! He is responsible,"

stated Owen, dismissing with an icy gesture the tragedies which had shaken New York.

"But why should he have struck in just those ways?"

"He has been trying out his power. The man is evidently resolved to dominate the world. He has every reason to want his own Police Commissioner in office, as a starter. And seeing that he reads minds and needs no telephones, he prefers that other people should be without the latter."

My head sank. I could find no words with which to comment upon the awful vista my imagination saw opening in front of me. What hope could Owen and Peter and I have of prevailing over Buwalda? I regarded our puny selves as being already as good as dead men.

"Come, brace up," said my brother. "We have a lot to do tonight. Get Kanarjian up here. Do you suppose he will obey instructions?"

"I have prepared him for that. He will obey," I answered.

I went to the head of the stairs and called. Peter was with us as fast as he could mount the four flights.

I could not help admiring the cool, impressive manner in which Owen received him. My brother stood in the middle of the room, his arms folded in the sleeves of his wine-colored dressing gown, his head slightly thrown back, his countenance as static as carved marble. He looked very much the man of mystery.

"You have confidence in me?" was his first question.

"Because Hugh recommends you, yes," replied Peter.

"I understand you are interested in Mrs. Griffin's Welfare."

"Profoundly so."

"You realize that the first essential is to control Buwalda, who controls her?"

"I do."

"Know, then, that Mrs. Griffin has been made practically a prisoner by Buwalda this afternoon. He will not let her out of his sight again."

I started, for I had no idea where Owen had obtained his information, and he would not vouchsafe details in Peter's presence.

"We cannot attack Buwalda—we cannot even locate him and Coralie Griffin—by ordinary means,"

he went on. "We ourselves are in desperate danger from Buwalda, except in this flat of mine. Here we are safe. I can invoke supernatural protection here."

The skin at the small of my back tingling, I remembered the nude female Presence that had appeared to us both, and was willing to take Owen's pledge at its face value.

Assertions of this stamp, however, were novel to Peter. I feared they would terrify him. Instead, they stiffened his resolve. "I am not afraid. Tell me what you wish me to do," he said, in a sharp, steady voice.

"Very well. I desire you and Hugh to start out at once, to find the girl, Anna Wagner, whom you once saw in a state of hypnosis, and bring her to me here.

Try to persuade her to come quietly. Use force, if that should be necessary."

"Can you really mean it?" I demanded. "We are to go the lengths of kidnaping that girl? For what purpose? If you need her as a medium, the worst thing we can do is to antagonize her."

"Ordinarily, an unwilling medium is useless, I grant you," replied Owen. "But we have reached a crisis and must risk many things. We shall isolate Anna Wagner, as a counter stroke to what Buwalda is doing with Coralie. We shall hold her indefinitely as a captive, and you will find that I can make her talk.

How is that for ruthlessness?"

"I accept your judgment," I said, and Peter supported me with a vigorous nod. "But don't you think you might come with us. We may have a hard job of it."

am sorry to seem to be shirking anything,"

answered Owen patiently. "The fact is, if I were to leave the apartment now, it would no longer be immune to invasion. We might lose our only refuge. I mean, we might discover upon our return that the protection we enjoy here had been neutralized. I cannot explain it any more clearly than that."

He was no physical coward. Though I like to think tl myself as being a man of action in comparison with Owen, I am probably the less courageous of the two.

At all events, I hesitated at the prospect of plunging again into the turbulent streets where every policeman might now be a deluded agent of Buwalda.

"Go get Anna Wagner," cried Owen sternly.

"We might just as well pitch in and be done with it, Hugh," added Peter in odd, fiat tones, in which I detected an undercurrent of ferocity.

I brought my head up with a jerk. "All right," I said, addressing my brother. "We'll be back as soon as it's humanly possible."

Peter and I turned right-about-face to our task. As we reached the front door, the Armenian laid his hand on my arm.

"Surely I may know his name now," he remarked.

"It's Doctor Proteus," I replied, giving the first name that came into my head. "A pseudonym, of course, but it fits him excellently well."

Sackett street, where Anna Wagner lived, is eight blocks south of Atlantic Avenue. The last named is the dividing line between Brooklyn Heights proper and the district now known as Red Hook, formerly South Brooklyn. The farther one gets away from the Avenue, the more rapid is the fall in the social scale.

Even Baltic Street, where Daniel Buwalda had held his seances, has definitely gone shabby. Sackett Street, three blocks beyond, has seen its old brick man-sions sink to the status of cheap rooming houses. The few flats were built under a primitive tenement law which did not require heating or hot water, and held it unnecessary that center rooms should be provided with windows.

A curious, provincial neighborhood is Red Hook, remote from the rest of Brooklyn because it has never been tapped by subways or elevated railroads. A single trunk street-car line, which runs down Court Street to Gowanus Bay, is its sole link with the heart of the borough. It is apt to be lawless and hard boiled. Its pleasure resorts are the only ones left in Greater New York which suggest the Bowery of the old days. The stranger is not particularly welcome.

In other words, when one gets as far south as Sackett Street, it is well to be on one's guard after dark. That being a fact at ordinary times, I considered the peril at least doubled on a night when the nerves of the city had been shocked.

But Peter and I had no sooner left the house on Columbia Heights than I knew we were to be targets for trouble, whether we invaded Red Hook at once or postponed our errand.

A man stepped from behind a lamp-post a few yards down the block, and commenced to trail us brazenly. At the next corner, I halted abruptly. The man also came to a stop. It seemed to be a matter of no importance to him how long I chose to hold up the procession. He merely lounged on the sidewalk and watched me from under a derby hat tilted forward to his eyebrows. I then swung in his direction, with Peter following me. The man retreated at about the same rate of speed that I advanced. He twisted his head around on his shoulder so that he could keep me in view. His hands were plunged into his overcoat pockets, where it was safe to assume that he had weapons for an emergency.

I felt that it would be madness to start a fight in the circumstances. Much better to figure on shaking off so obvious a spy, I concluded. So I signalled to Peter, and we went on our way with redoubled haste, "The thing I can't understand is why we're allowed to live by fellows of that sort," I said. "What's the object in shadowing us, when we could be put out of the way so easily?"

"The man is one of Buwalda's agents, of course,"

muttered Peter.

"We must suppose that he is, consciously or unconsciously. The same applies to the cop who prevented us from talking to Coralie a few hours ago. Why did that cop not shoot us, or at least place us under arrest? It's beyond me."

Peter shook his head helplessly, and I said no more for fear of adding to my own bewilderment as much as for any other reason.

The sidewalks became crowded as we approached Atlantic Avenue, and from the Borough Hall section there was a rumble of innumerable voices. I had imagined that we would have to walk to Sackett Street, The distance made it hardly worth while to take the trolley, and cabs are always uncertain in times of confusion.

On the avenue, however, we found three taxis drawn up by the curb. Two of them were without chauffeurs. Behind the wheel of the third, a young Irishman lolled, his cap on one ear and a cigarette dangling from his lips.

"Can you take us a few blocks?" I demanded.

"Surest thing you know," he replied boisterously.

"I may run over a couple of boobs on the way, but anything goes tonight."

"Why do you say that?"

"The town's gone crazy, because of the murders and no telephones. Ain't you read the news? People arc runnin' across the streets the way the chicken Crossed the road, and the cops don't know who to pinch. Hell, what's the diff ?"

"Be as careful as you can. I don't want to land in a station-house," I said anxiously. And I gave him Anna Wagner's address.

Peter and I entered the cab and slammed the door.

But the driver, in spite of his loud talk, was slow in Starting. I could not see him clearly because the glass that separated us was filmed with mist. Impatiently, I rubbed it with my sleeve. A profile leaped up before my eyes. It was that of the chauffeur. He was looking toward the sidewalk, and his lips were moving. I then flung myself over to the side window of the cab.

Standing very close to us was the "shadow" from Columbia Heights. With his hand raised to the level of his face, he completed a message directed at the chauffeur in some kind of sign language, turned on his heel and dashed away. At the same moment, tk vehicle lurched forward.

"Good Lord! Did you get on to that maneuver?"!

cried to Peter.

He had been looking over my shoulder. "Yes," he answered in a toneless voice. "There is conspiracy oa all sides of us—mystery, doom! To think he should have known this driver!"

"He may not have known him. Don't you understand? Buwalda controls his agents mentally, and no doubt can extend his sorcery to strangers the agents meet."

I hammered on the glass and yelled to the chauffeur to stop and let us out. But he merely turned his head, grinned broadly, threw the clutch wide open and sent his car careering up the avenue at a speed that mocked at all regulations. He swept around the corner at Court Street like a fire engine, and ate up the long blocks to Sackett Street in less than a minute. Then, seeming to fear he had drawn official attention, he dodged down another street, completed a rough circle and landed us at the door of the lodging house to which we were bound.

Peter and I had been hanging on to each other, to minimize the formidable bumping of the cab. We now tumbled out to the sidewalk, and I at least was fighting mad.

"He picked the wrong man for the job, eh?"

"You said it. I acted as if his wishes was O.K. with me, but I was thinkin': 'I hope you choke, you big stiff!' And as for you bozos, you may be second-story workers for all I care s'long as you don't forget to slip me a good tip."

I looked hard at his humorous, pug-nosed Irish fact and felt certain he was speaking the truth. He had been in contact with one of Buwalda's illusions, but at second hand it had not been powerful enough to dominate him. His own obsession against the police had been the stronger, and thus a situation had been created that might be turned to our advantage.

Pulling a ten dollar bill from my pocket, I pressed it into his hand. "That's just a starter," I said. "If you stick by us this evening, I'll give you twenty more."

He winked. "Suits me."

"What's your name?"

"Tim Nolan, of Pioneer Street, this section."

"All right, Nolan. We're looking for a girl in this house, and we expect to take her away with us."

"Rough stuff, huh?"

"Not unless our plans go wrong. Anyway, I want you to wait for us. Keep your eye open for anybody who seems to be on our trail, and warn us if there's real danger. Will you do that?"

"What do you mean—" I began, thrusting my face towards that of the chauffeur.

He threw up his hand and slashed it down again in a scornful gesture, the palm outward.

"Keep your shirt on!" he said. "I done you a favor, if you only knew it. Instead of bawlin' me out, you should be singin' a 'Hail Mary!' to rejoice that I hate cops the way I hate them."

"You may think it revenge on the cops to break the speed limit, but I don't," I said angrily.

"Shoot! I don't mean that," he chuckled. "I'm thinkin' of the big bull on Atlantic Avenue, and what he wanted me to do with you."

"At the time we got into your cab?" I asked, as the connection clicked in my brain.

"Sure. That hefty captain—"

"Was he really a police captain?" I insisted curiously.

"Hell, yes! Didn't you see his cap, and the gold lacc and all? Well, he says to me: 'Drive those two bums over to the Poplar Street station and give 'em in charge. They're wanted for burglary. I can't go along with you, but if you pass an officer on the way tell him the facts and let him make the arrests.' That's what he says to me, and he followed it up with a high sign the bulls use down here in Red Hook when they mean business."

"Surest thing you know. What am I to call you?"

"My name is Hugh Purcell," I answered quietly, for I saw no reason in the extraordinary circumstances to conceal my identity. "My friend here is Mr. Peter Kanarjian."

Nolan nodded, slouched down on to the small of his back and lit a cigarette. "Bring on the jane," he said flippantly. "I'm with you to the finish."

Peter and I ran up the steps of the dingy brick house, and I rang the bell. A woman in a frowzy wrapper came to the door. She looked at us apathetically while I explained that we were friends of Anna Wagner and wished to see her.

"Second floor rear. I guess she's home," she mumbled, and turned away.

In Red Hook, the niceties of announcing visitors arc seldom observed.

We mounted the stairs and knocked. A light, dragging footstep approached the door from the other side.

Then Anna opened to us. I had taken it for granted that she would receive us sympathetically. We had rescued her from the streets, or at least had appeared to do so, on the occasion of her arrival at my flat. She had invited us to go to see her.

But Anna was now a very different girl from the victim of hypnosis on whom I had been banking. She was once more the mouse-like creature I had first observed taking tickets at the seance on Baltic Street The color fled from her face when she saw us standing before her. She shook all over. Yet her lips tightened with a suggestion of that stubbornness of which weak people are often capable.

"May we come in and have a chat with you, Miss Wagner?" I asked.

"I'm all alone. Wh—what do you want?" she stammered.

"I happened to meet some one who saw you near Prospect Park when you were sleepwalking the other night," I lied. "Thought you'd be interested. The man is a doctor and may be able to give you some good advice."

"I don't need advice. Nothing of that kind will ever happen to me again."

"Won't it?" I said sternly, perceiving the necessity of overawing her. "It's a mistake to be too confident Your health is at stake."

My words scared her beyond reason. She stepped backwards, wringing her hands, and we improved the opportunity to follow her into the room. I felt a deep pity for her, and not a little shame at myself, as she scurried here and there seeking vainly for a way of escape. Finally, she sat on a rickety divan, and raised pale blue eyes to meet ours. Tears were trickling slowly down her cheeks.

"You must not be frightened of us. We come here as your friends," I declared as convincingly as possible.

"It—it is not true. You are enemies," she surprised by retorting.

I knew then that Buwalda had somehow reestablished his influence over her. It would be useless to ask her whether she had seen him, for she would surely deny it. The reasonable assumption was, that it had not had the time to give to a physical interview. But if he had taken the trouble to reach out for her mentally, he would not want her to fall into my hands. He would be aware of what was happening at the present moment, and he would act. We were lost unless we accomplished our mission with the utmost speed.

"Miss Wagner, the doctor I mentioned would like to treat you for sleepwalking," I said bluntly. "Will you go with us to his office?"

"No, no, no!" she wailed. "I won't go anywhere with you. I'll let you kill me first."

I moved my face closer to hers and gazed steadily into her eyes. My object was to beat down her will in a normal, human way. But to my astonishment I saw all the muscles of her face start to relax, while the luster faded from her eyes. I remembered then that, ill awakening her from her last trance, I had told her she would forever be subject to hypnotism at my command. It is a scientific fact that an order issued to the subjective mind under such conditions takes precedence over any other influence that may be brought to bear. I cursed myself for having wasted time in arguing with her when this powerful weapon was available.

"Anna Wagner, you will now pass into a trance similar to the one that possessed you two evenings ago," I intoned solemnly. "You cannot choose but obey me."

She offered no resistance. Her head swayed on her thin neck, then steadied to complete immobility. Her mouth softened, and her stare became fixed. Her state of hypnosis seemed actually to be a continuation of her earlier experience, and I thought it likely that she had been placed instantly en rapport thereby with the spirit of James Griffin. I longed to question her, but could not risk another minute's delay.

I glanced at Peter. His brooding melancholy had grown stoical, as if nothing could startle him any more. He bit on his lower lip and shrugged one shoulder. "You, too, are a magician," he muttered.

"Come with us, Anna," I said, ignoring his remark.

The girl arose without a word, put on her hat and coat, and walked between Peter and myself through the doorway and down the stairs to the street. I held her by one arm, to guide her steps or to catch her in case she should fall. But the precaution was superfluous. She was the calmest, the most sure-footed of the three of us.

We found Tim Nolan pacing the sidewalk, his hands hanging by the thumbs to his trouser pockets, and his cap threatening to topple from the one ear that supported it.

"Looka here, Boss, there's a gang collected at the Court Street end of the block, and they're not overlookin' what happens around this cab," he said, addressing me.

"We don't have to leave by way of Court Street, do we?"

"We do not. But there's just as big a mob at the other end," he announced, in plain enjoyment of the dramatic suspense.

"How do you know they're interested in us?" I demanded, worried.

"Scouts from both sides have been down here givin' me the once over. I can most always smell trouble, and I smell it now."

"Nonsense. If they wanted us, they'd rush us now.

They wouldn't have to bottle up the street."

Nolan gave me a pitying look. "I'll be askin' you just one thing. Are you dead set on makin' a getaway?"

"Certainly."

"Well, leave it to me."

He hopped into his seat behind the wheel. I opened the door and handed Anna into the cab. Peter and I followed more slowly.

"Go easy, now. Slip through the crowd without any trouble, if you can," I said to Nolan.

He grinned comically at me over his shoulder.

Swinging the taxi around until it was in the middle of the roadway and headed for Court Street, he sent it gliding smoothly forward for a few yards. But, as I might have guessed, the fighting Irish lunatic had no notion of managing the situation with diplomacy.

Suddenly he launched into a wild burst of speed that far outdid his exploits of the outbound trip.

"Whoopee! On to the Rhine! And damn the casualties!" he yelled.

I have never learned to this day whether he killed any of the gangsters who tried to stop us as we thundered around the turning. The car bumped over obstacles that almost capsized us. I prefer not to know whether they were the bodies of human beings.

Shrieks and curses clamored in our ears. A dozen revolvers were fired. Bullets pierced the hood of the machine, and fragments of wood and leather were sprinkled upon us. I caught vague glimpses in the darkness of twisted faces and hands that clutched at us in passing. But none of us were wounded, and the peril merely gave a new stimulus to Tim Nolan's reckless soul. Once clear of Sackett Street and speeding northward, he broke into peal after peal of laughter.

Bizarre as was the chauffeur's conduct, however, there was something even weirder in going through such an experience in the company of Anna Wagner.

Sitting bolt upright and staring ahead of her, she had seemed unaware of the tumult. This girl, as timid as x hare, who ordinarily would have fainted if a gun had been fired in her direction, had maintained the poise of a visitor from another world to whom human strife was meaningless. It could not have been otherwise, since she was hypnotized. I shivered, nevertheless.

When we reached Borough Hall, I leaned forward and gave Nolan the number of the house on Columbia Heights. He doubled into Montague Street, but halted of his own accord at the near corner of Owen's block.

"There's that big bull again," he growled.

On the sidewalk directly in front of the house stood the "shadow" whom Nolan saw as a captain of police.

"Never mind him," I said. "We'll fight our way by, if we have to."

"But I do mind, Boss," drawled the young desperado. "Just watch me learn him a lesson."

He drove the taxi slowly down, the street, skirted the sidewalk across the way from Owen's house, ami proceeded several doors beyond the point where he should have stopped. Obviously surprised and curious the spy started to cross the roadway. Then Nolan reversed his engine, and sent the car lurching back-wards with a violence that strained its gear to the breaking point. He missed his man by inches.

The spy reeled in his tracks, fell his full length on; the asphalt, then scrambled erect again and fled in the direction of Pierrepont Street.

Nolan was chuckling as he landed us at our door, I paid him the twenty dollars promised. "You're a good scrapper, even if you are crazy," I said. "Do you want to work for us some more?"

"You bet."

"There are no telephones, so the best thing is for you to call here tomorrow at ten and ask for Purcell.

I may need you, or I may not. But keep in touch, anyway."

He saluted and drove off.

As Peter, Anna and I mounted the stairs to Owen's flat, the roaring of a distant explosion shook the city.

Owen was his imperturbable self when he opened the door to us. He held in his left hand a copy of the "Zohar," and gave the impression of being politely tolerant of the interruption to his researches in that book of cabalistic lore.

His first glance was for Anna Wagner, whom he had never seen before, but no one could have told from his face whether he found her the type he had expected, and whether it astonished him that we had delivered her at the flat in a condition of trance. The last-named fact certainly did not escape him, for he took her by the hand and led her to an armchair wordlessly. Then he turned towards Peter and me, his eyelids narrowing.

Peter broke the silence. "The trip we made was a nightmare. We were spied upon, and assaulted by madmen. I understand nothing of it. But at least we have brought you the medium, Doctor Proteus."

The shadow of a smile flickered over my brother's lips. Where a simpler man might have blurted out a denial of his new name, he took it as a matter of course. Owen is never caught napping. He must have been aware that I would be forced to invent an alias for him, and though the theatrical "Proteus" amused him he accepted it as being as good as any other.

"You have done very well," he said. "Now remember that I am not yet Buwalda's equal at mind reading, and give me a clear account of what happened."

Between us, we told the story of the foray to Red Hook. Our physical adventures drew no comment from him. His attitude was that of an officer in time of war who discounts the dangers suffered by his scouts. But our description of the chauffeur, Tim Nolan, earned an approving nod.

"I'm glad you bespoke him for the morning. We can probably use him. A daredevil who is not bluffed by phantasms. Hm! Quite a find, I should say. Let us have supper."

He strolled in the direction of his kitchenette, with a coolness and apparent indifference to the situation that was too much for Peter's nerves.

"Doctor, will you not explain some of these mysteries?" he cried hoarsely. "Why did the mob in Sackett Street attack us only after we had left Anna's house? And the spy who told Nolan we were burglars, what—"

Owen held up his hand. "My dear Mr. Kanarjian, I'm not clever enough to answer all the 'whys' and 'whats' in this affair. I plan to seek supernatural guidance—after supper, if you don't mind."

"Supernatural!" muttered the Armenian. "Is that a word for sane persons to employ?"

"Yes, because we have no other with which to define knowledge that has not yet been charted. You spoke just now of having undergone a nightmare.

You met it boldly, though you failed to understand it.

A new and stranger nightmare—let us call it that— will occur here soon. What's the odds! All things that his senses record are equally real, or unreal, to a philosopher, and carry no terrors for a brave man."

The subtle flattery had its effect. A light flashed in Peter's eyes. His lips tightened, and he took a chair beside the far-gazing, weirdly tranquil form of Anna Wagner. While Owen arranged the table and brought out supplies of his favored salads, cheeses and dried fruits, I moved over to the window seat and gave way for the first time to personal worries not immediately related to our battle with Buwalda.

Prior to the afternoon of this day, the menace of ! the mind reader's bid for power had seemed a thing that would be disastrous in a general sense, but that would not literally injure the millions of citizens who never encountered him. Now, with the life of the city disrupted by bloody riots, with the collapse of the telephone system and a demoralized police force, every one was in danger. I thought of my mother and my sister Eleanor, of the sweet girl Roberta Collins with whom I had been falling in love at the time of the fatal seance on Baltic Street. It scarcely appeared possible that less than a week ago I had jazzed and flirted with Roberta at the dance given by Eleanor. Such innocent pleasures were far, far behind the man who tormented himself about the safety of both girls tonight. Did the impassive Owen spare a thought even for our mother? I wondered.

"Supper is ready," he called.

By no means the least curious feature of our response was the fact that, as Peter and I moved forward to the table, the hypnotized Anna came also and sat down to the meal. The four of us ate silently and in haste.

In his fastidious bachelor way, Owen cleared the table and set the kitchenette in order before he would tackle the problem that had me almost mad with suspense. Finally, he stood before us, his hands in the pockets of his old dressing gown, and spoke with the detached assurance of the adept.

"We shall now see what the girl can tell us. Her present trance is simple in character. It releases her from her ordinary inhibitions. She will give us the truth, as known to her in her waking state. But I doubt if she can pierce to any of Buwalda's recent secrets, either mental or material."

"The spirit of James Griffin may speak through her, since it was the original cause of her hypnosis," I suggested.

"Very true. But the spirits of those lately dead are fumbling and inaccurate. Unless we get really remarkable answers from that source, we shall proceed to the higher necromancy."

"A seance like the last one you held with me?" I mumbled, and could feel that the blood had drained itself from my cheeks.

"Yes. The presence of Anna, still unawakened but passive, will be a great help to us. The forces of good and evil flock from distant planes when a hypnotized human being sits in a circle of mystics."

Peter looked utterly bewildered, but Owen paid no attention to him. "You start questioning her, Hugh,"

he said. "She has already had a session with you and is familiar with your voice. Later, I may take the conversation away from you."

The girl was standing by the mantelpiece.

"Anna, have you seen Buwalda since the evening when you walked in your sleep?" I asked quietly.

"No," she answered, and her voice was startling in its clarity after her long spell of bemused silence.

"Have you heard from him?"

"He has not written to me."

"Has he sent you a message of any other kind?"

"The professor never uses the telephone. He has not wired me, or sent a messenger," she answered slowly and as if doubtfully. "No, I have not heard from him."

I felt it was useless to press the point. She was telling the truth, as she understood it. Almost certainly, she had had a telepathic communication from Buwalda, but this would have seemed to her to come from within herself, to have been merely a surging up of emotion concerning him. I changed my tack.

"Have you any idea where he may have moved from Baltic Street? Where he is now?"

"He deserted me, and I do not know where he is, I told you that before."

"Yes, Anna. But since then I have had a dream about Buwalda. I thought I saw him in a very large room. It might have been the living-room of a duplex apartment. He was surrounded by new furniture. Does that suggest anything to you?"

A mournful expression came upon the girl's face as I spoke. "It is like the apartment he used to say we were to have when he should be rich," she murmured.

"Did you ever figure out the part of town it was to be in?"

"Oh, yes! Park Avenue. Always Park Avenue."

"Had you chosen the building?"

"No. The professor was not rich yet."

I glanced at Owen, who nodded and signalled to me to continue.

"If you have not seen Buwalda, Anna, perhaps you have seen the gentleman who sent you to me the other night?"

She shuddered. "No! Thank God, he has kept away from me."

"Why do you feel that way? The last time you described him as being 'a handsome man' and 'a nice man.

"He is an enemy," she cried vehemently. "I did not guess it at first, but I know now. He hates the professor and would do him harm. It was to injure Professor Buwalda that the strange man sent me to you."

"What makes you so sure of that, Anna?"

"No one has told me, but I feel it here." She pressed her hands to her heaving breast. "I—I love the professor—in spite of all—and I do not want to help his enemies."

"Do you regard us as being equally hostile?"

"Yes," she replied flatly. "I talk to you only because I cannot help it. You are—"

The words were cut short in her throat. She choked for a few seconds in agonized fashion, and her eyes rolled. Then a thing of surpassing weirdness occurred.

All animation disappeared from her face and her eyelids fluttered downward until they were closed. Her lips, however, went on moving, soundlessly for a while. Then brusquely she began to speak in the hoarse, deep tones of a man. I needed no one to inform me that it was a case of possession by an invading spirit. But the singularity of the manifestation lay in the fact that the message was addressed to herself.

"It is a great error on your part to mistrust these men, Anna Wagner," came rumbling from her own thin lips. "Before it is too late, turn against your lover instead, for he is a human fiend."

I knew that I had heard that voice before, but for the moment I was so rattled that I could not remember when or where. Peter set me straight.

"My God! It's Griffin—James Griffin," he cried, with a touch of hysteria. "Do you know I'm here, Jim? Can you see me?"

Owen stepped swiftly forward and interposed himself between the Armenian and Anna. "Leave this to me," he commanded. "You, also, Hugh. Absolute silence from both of you, please."

We gave way, and there followed a dialogue in which my brother hurled his questions directly at the unseen visitor that was using the vocal organs of our frail medium. The effect was profoundly uncanny.

"Never mind about giving advice to the girl, Griffin," he snapped. "She's a love-struck dupe, and you can't influence her. Are you willing to talk directly to me?"

"Yes."

"What is the secret of Buwalda's power?"

"I cannot explain it to you."

"Do you understand it yourself?"

"Yes. But it is a thing I must not tell to a mortal— especially to you."

Owen clenched his hands. "Why? Why?"

"It is an awful weapon to place in the hands of any man. You might misuse it. Already you know too much."

"Buwalda is scourging the world. He is victimizing Coralie, whom you loved on earth. You desire me to fight him, yet I cannot do that successfully until I have his secret."

"You are wrong. All that you need to accomplish is the death of Buwalda."

"And allow his secret to die with him?"

"Yes. It is better so."

To my astonishment, Owen went white with anger.

"Never, if I can help it!" he said fiercely. "My religion is the pursuit of knowledge. Who are you to thwart me? You are only the spirit of James Griffin, a weaker soul than my own. I forbid you to leave this room until I say you may go. I order you to answer my questions."

The reply came promptly, but upon a curious whimpering note. "Beware what you ask! Thereto opposition to you in the spirit world. If I reveal too much, it may draw a vengeance upon this company— not upon me, who am immaterial and cannot be harmed."

"Buwalda has a supernatural ally. Is that it?"

"Say, rather, that you have a foe who is resolved to keep from you the supreme occult wisdom that you seek."

"Ah!" Owen's head jerked backwards and his neck muscles grew taut. "I am not afraid," he declared stubbornly after a brief pause. "Explain Buwalda's power to me. I demand it."

"The languages spoken by mortals contain no words sufficiently subtle and precise for such an explanation."

"You are evading me. Now answer, point by point.

When Buwalda passes one solid object through another—as, for instance, a tambourine through a screen —is his mind simultaneously enabled to penetrate other minds?"

"Yes."

"Is that his sole method of causing conscious telepathy?"

"Yes."

"Could any one given the trick use it as readily a he?"

"Yes." This third "Yes" was a mere whisper.

"The trick, then—the trick! How is 'throughth,' as I call it, performed? How?—not why."

The lips of Anna Wagner moved. A faint sound came from them, but the words were indistinguishable. Plainly, the mystic possession was coming to an end.

Owen's face grew terrible to look at. "You must continue," he cried, with a ferocity of which I had not believed him capable. "How is throughth performed?"

There was a mumbled answer, even weaker than before.

"Your power of speaking with this medium's lips and tongue is waning for the present," my brother conceded in desperation. "Try, all the same, to tell us one thing more. A few syllables will suffice. What is Buwalda's address?"

"Five Thousand and Eleven—" The figures were pronounced clearly, and I jotted them down on my cuff. With the last syllable of "eleven," however, the voice broke off.

"You've finished, eh?" said Owen bitterly. "Leave the girl's body. Materialize. I command you to stay in the room, James Griffin, until you can be of service to us again."

I went cold with fear at the audacity of this demand. Surely it was not possible to bully a ghost, to order it about like a slave, I told myself. But I was far from comprehending the extent of Owen's power.

As I watched, a thin mist began to shape on the left side of Anna's body. Then an arm, large and masculine, emerged from her shoulder. A man's legs swung free, and finally the head was visible. The whole tall frame was detached from hers, and stood waveringly beside her.

The face was perfectly familiar to me. I had seen it twice before. Once in the flesh, on the occasion of his suicide, or murder, call it which you will. The second time as a wraith in the fog, the afternoon his corpse had been buried in Woodlawn Cemetery.

Owen turned to Peter and myself, his eyes glittering, but his features restored otherwise to their habitual calm.

"I have known a medium's life to be snuffed out, like that!"—he snapped his fingers—"when a case of possession was brought to too sudden a finish. But Anna has come through it very nicely. Hm! The conditions for producing high-power magic in the next hour or so couldn't possibly be bettered."

"Why?" I asked faintly.

"We have in this room a hypnotized mortal and a captive phantom. The combination is enough to lure gods and devils." He fumbled for a cigarette, lit it and inhaled the smoke with a sombre, intense ardor.

"By the way, Hugh, that number—Five Thousand and Eleven—does it mean anything to you?"

"It may be a number on Park Avenue. Anna told us Buwalda had always dreamed of Park Avenue."

"The guess is logical. Well, I expect to be certain about it before the night's over."

In the short breathing spell that Owen, seemed disposed to allow us, I looked about me and reflected that indeed we now formed the strangest company ever gathered together for a seance. The ghost of James Griffin had wandered to the far end of the room, where it paced uneasily in front of a bookcase that was visible through it. Anna still stood rigidly by the mantelpiece. She had reopened her eyes, but this was the sole change in her appearance. Beside me, the face of poor Peter Kanarjian had frozen to a mask of grim acceptance of the incomprehensible. To all intents and purposes, he, also, was in a condition of trance.

From the normal, human point of view, Owen and I were no less isolated than we had been a week earlier when we had made our last formidable appeal to the supernatural. And I was none too sure that I retained the balance and the full measure of courage I had once had.

My brother strolled over to me. "I may as well be frank and warn you that we must count upon having trouble with Vulpia," he said, lowering his voice.

My mouth fell open. "Vulpia!" I repeated in amazement. "Who on earth do you mean?"

"The succubus," he answered, as nonchalantly as if he had reference to the tenant of the neighboring flat.

I remembered the weird creature, the perilous, seductive Presence, half woman and half spirit, who had come at our first call and had twined her arms around Owen's neck. It had not occurred to me that she could have a name. Yet he was calling her familiarly by one that derived from the Latin for she-fox.

The skin between my shoulder blades crinkled as if it had been touched by something cold.

"Why should we have trouble with her?" I muttered.

"She will be angry to find the girl, Anna, here. She hates the female of our breed. It is a quirk of hers. I cannot go into details."

"Can't you keep Vulpia away from this session?"

"That—no. She invariably appears when I throw wide the doors to eternity."

He bit off his words curtly, and stepped into the side room where he had obtained the inflammable substance with which he had cast his previous spell. This time he returned with a scarlet lacquered box instead of a green one. He took Anna by the hand and led her to a seat at the mahogany center table. Beside her he placed Peter. I sensed his wishes accurately airdropped into the chair opposite Peter, thus leaving.

Owen the chair between myself and Anna. Morbidly I wondered how it was that a seat had not been provided for the ghost also! It would have added a final touch to the situation, had our circle been complete!

by the pale wraith of James Griffin. The latter, however, continued to prowl restlessly in the background.

Its eyes glowed dimly phosphorescent and remained fixed upon us, no matter how often the posture of the shadowy body was changed.

Owen opened his box and began to strew its mud-like contents in a ring about the table, as he had done the done before. I noted that this "mud" differed slightly in appearance. It was lumpy and there were metallic glints in it that suggested mica. When the ring was almost closed, Owen retreated to his chair and threw the last handful. His aim was good. We were hemmed in. He then set fire with a match to the incredible substance. A galloping flame reduced it to char within a few seconds. Once more, I saw a debris composed of bones, but this time they were all skulls— the skulls of bats and mice and birds, with here and there a dreadful tiny cranium of human shape. Since no baby's head ever was so small, I could only conclude that they were the remains of the young of some variety of pygmy ape unknown to the naturalists.

Owen cupped his crystal ball in both palms and into it. A heavy silence settled upon the room.

I expected at any instant to see the succubus, Vulpia, materialize from behind the bookcases. But the minutes passed, and she did not come.

Then my brother pushed the crystal away from him.

Hollowed his stare to a point over my left shoulder r;d saw the outline of a queer-looking old woman, who was tottering on uncertain feet across the room.

Her head was thrust forward like that of a turtle. Her cheeks hung in pouches below the line of her jaw. She was clothed in some tight fitting stuff that suggested black silk. But body and raiment were equally transparent. She was a phantom.

I had never seen any one who resembled her in the feast, and I could tell from the faces of Owen and Peter that they also were puzzled. Owen frowned, and his lips parted as if to ask a question. But he was interrupted, startlingly, by the clear, monotonous treble of Anna Wagner.

"This is Mrs. Caroline Sharpe," she said. "She used to be a regular attendant at the professor's seances on Baltic Street. Six months ago, she died."

"It is very good of her to visit us. No doubt she comes with a message," commented Owen.

The old woman lifted a pair of agonized eyes to meet our own. Her flabby mouth quivered. She seemed to be trying to mumble words, but we failed to hear a sound.

"Is the message about Buwalda?" my brother asked.

The spectral head nodded slowly.

"Did you not hear what she said?" droned Anna.

"She accused the professor of poisoning her for her money. It is a wicked lie, of course. She insists on repeating it. She says: 'Poisoned! Poisoned! As soon as I had made a will leaving him all I had, he poisoned me!

"Find out from her how large her fortune was,"

demanded Owen.

There was a brief silence, while the lips of the phantom twitched.

"It was only three thousand dollars," announced Anna. "The cruel, bad woman says that the professor worked on her mind by means of table tipping and card tricks. He told her that her money would be used for the cause of spiritualism. Then he sent her a cough syrup that had been doctored and that killed her, Merciful God! How can she utter this lie against a wonderful man—the man I love?"

A shudder ran through me as I listened. I pictured Buwalda in his days of poverty, when he had been nothing but a charlatan making a slender living from the admission fees to his seances. The hoodwinking of old women would inevitably have been part of his game, though I had not thought him capable of committing a crude, physical murder. The revelation concerning him opened a way for us to have him sentenced to jail or the electric chair, if only we could win our present psychic battle with him. The corpse of Caroline Sharpe could be exhumed. Traces of poison in her stomach would be enough to set the District Attorney's office to work on the case.

In the meantime, the faith of Anna in this master criminal was something almost unbearably pathetic.

She repeated the gruesome accusations from beyond the grave because she was herself hypnotized and could not help repeating them. We had enslaved her brain, her voice, but her soul kept aloof from our sorcery and continued to adore Buwalda.

Owen was pressing her for more details. I heard him ask for confirmation of the supposed address on Park Avenue. But Anna replied dully: "The woman whispers, 'Poisoned!' and then she groans and says, 'Poisoned!' again. She can think of nothing except that."

The ghost had now turned away from us. Clasping and unclasping its thin hands, it floated to the far corner of the room where it joined the other wraith that was awaiting my brother's pleasure. Caroline Sharpe and James Griffin, both victims of Buwalda, put their heads together and conversed eerily, without audible words.

I glanced at Owen and detected a look of worry about his crisped mouth and narrowed eyelids.

"What is the matter?" I murmured.

"It is a bad sign that Vulpia should not have shown herself. Ordinarily, she is the first to come," he answered.

"You are sure she knows what is going on?"

"Yes, yes! She is present, but she is hiding. That means—um!—disapproval, at least. And God knows we're likely to need her protection soon."

I reflected, with a curious sense of distaste, that my brother had as good as told me that the succubus was jealous of him, that she was furious because Anna was in his apartment. I had seen the creature kiss him, and she was far from being an impalpable spirit. I shivered, but the next moment such considerations were swept aside by an appalling event.

A shadow fell across the table, and a rank animal odor assailed my nostrils. Apparently flying from outdoors, a huge bat had entered the room. It was followed by three others. Their wings had a span of no less than thirty inches, a size unknown in America, but that is normal for the giant fruit-eating bats of the Philippines. Impossible, however, to regard them as living wanderers from a far clime. They could not have been lurking on the premises, and the doors and windows were all closed.

Flitting grotesquely, their wings almost clashing in the constricted space, they careered around and around the room for several minutes. I noticed that they did not pass above our heads. It was as if they dared not infringe the circle of skulls within which we sat. But suddenly one of them flopped to the carpet with a horrible sprawling gesture. The others did likewise.

They edged their bodies toward us, digging the bony hooks on their wings into the nap and hauling themselves along. When they reached the charred ring of debris, they sat up on their rudimentary hind legs and balanced themselves with their outstretched membranous pinions.

Their heads were the most monstrous caricatures of mortality that I had ever visioned in my worst nightmare. Unbelievably wrinkled and hairless, with gigantic ears, deep eye-sockets and skinned teeth, they were nevertheless more human than bestial.

Gibbering and twittering, the unholy visitors crowded us from all sides. The tips of their wings brushed the little skulls upon the floor and pushed them nearer to us inch by inch. The ring that guarded Us was perceptibly growing smaller.

I was not frightened, for the situation was beyond the scope of ordinary fear. Rather, I had a sense of doom. I knew these Things to be demons, and I wav sure that as soon as they were close enough they would kill us. My eyes stole to the faces of my companions, Anna, sunk in her hypnotic trance, was unaffected, Owen was stoical and pale. Peter had fainted.

But at what might easily have proved to be the last moment of our lives, I perceived an unwonted quivering of the air above an antique oak cabinet that stood between the table and the nearest bookcase. A mist formed. Abruptly, the materialized body of Vulpia stepped out of the cabinet, or clear through it from the far side, I could not tell which. I saw for the second time that wild pagan face, green-eyed and framed with luxuriant bronze-red curls, that luminous flesh, that supple, mincing carriage.

Vulpia smiled. It was impossible to tell whether she were pleased or angry, for her expression conveyed both cruelty and delight. She rushed upon the hideous bats, shrilling her high-pitched scream that resembled the tone of a violin string which has been stretched too tautly. She clutched and struck at them, but they arose with a gusty flapping and zigzagged out of her reach. Twice they made the circuit of the room, and then they passed in single file through the upper pane of the window that was still closed.

Owen permitted himself a sigh of relief. He looked hard at Vulpia, but she ignored him. She moved close to Anna Wagner, tossed her head back to the shoulders and laughed, while staring sideways and downward at the hypnotized girl. Her laughter was like the tinkling of very thin glass bells. Her fingers curved, as though she were about to tear at Anna's cheeks. Then she swung her hips and arms in a contemptuous rhythm and sauntered over to the window, where she stood with her back toward us.

"We are all right now. She will guard the place, and we can probably get in touch with the right kind of control," said Owen, with his almost inhuman sang froid.

He lifted the hands of Anna Wagner and laid them upon the table. He rested his own finger-tips upon the board, and, as I imitated him, I looked to see if the ghosts were gone. The shade of James Griffin was there yet, obedient and mournful, its head bowed upon its hollow breast. But Caroline Sharpe had fled.

Presently, a rapping at the core of the wood announced that the table was functioning. I thought to witness a trance on the part of Owen, with possession and a message uttered in the voice natural to the control. This was what had happened on former occasions. But there is no foretelling the form that a psychic manifestation will take. My brother's identity was not submerged this time. He was aware speedily of what to expect, and he concentrated upon his crystal ball.

"Hm! It's to be another materialization," he observed, discarding the crystal as he spoke.

A specter thereupon appeared from nowhere and stood at the end of the table nearest Owen. It was the wraith of a middle-aged man, with trig waxed mustaches and wearing a business suit. It seemed more solid than the other ghosts that had been in the room that evening—and considerably better poised, more sure of itself.

"First rate!" exclaimed Owen. "It's—"

The mechanical, cold tones of Anna cut into his speech. "This is Henry Dickinson," she stated. "He died five years ago, and he returns from a high plane of existence in the afterworld to visit us."

I recalled that Dickinson had been the name of the dead lawyer who had communicated through Owen the week before, and who had warned us of Buwalda's exploits on the Stock Exchange. I questioned my brother with raised eyebrows. His nod assured me that I was making no mistake.

"Henry Dickinson says that the professor is frightened at the enmity of Owen Purcell, whose knowledge he respects," Anna continued.

"Very flattering, I am sure," remarked Owen.

"But does he know what has been going on in this room tonight?"

"He does not know, because all the minds here are closed to him. He is aware, however, that the seance is in progress, and it worries him. Particularly is he alarmed that I should be the medium."

"What are his immediate plans?"

"He has suspended the campaign of terror that he waged against the public today. The explosion heard when I entered this house was the blowing up of a battleship in the Brooklyn Navy Yard. The professor compelled the officers to destroy the boat, Henry Dickinson tells me. But tomorrow there is to be peace until the professor decides whether you are clever enough to strike back at him."

"Clever enough!" repeated Owen. "It's rather a matter of my finding out how throughth is performed.

Get Dickinson to explain the method, and I'll strike as fast as a rattlesnake."

There was a grievously prolonged pause that jangled our nerves. Then Anna resumed speaking in a labored, hard voice: "The control says that it is impossible to define throughth to persons still in the flesh. Buwalda himself does not understand it, but only knows that when Coralie Griffin is near to him he can perform it."

"What! What!" cried Owen, electrified as I had never seen him before. "Is Coralie to be regarded as an essential factor?"

"She is the essential factor."

"Is Buwalda powerless when she is absent?"

"Yes."

"Where are they now?"

"They are together at his home."

My attention was caught just then by a gasp from Peter, who had recovered from his fainting spell.

"Give me the address," demanded Owen.

Again the medium hesitated. It was not her fault, for she was an instrument without a will. But doubt was marked upon the shadowy face of Henry Dickinson's ghost—and that was decidedly odd.

My brother ground his teeth with impatience. He swung about and beckoned to the Griffin phantom, which approached grudgingly.

"You must have recovered your strength by this time," snapped Owen. "You tell us Buwalda's address."

"It is Five Thousand and Eleven Fifth Avenue,"

came from Anna's white lips—and she fell face forward upon the table.

At the same moment, the wraiths of Dickinson and Griffin vanished. My eyes sought Vulpia at the window. Her beautiful nude form had disappeared. The seance was over.

"Fifth Avenue—not Park Avenue," muttered Owen. "The detail was worth fighting for."

He arose and examined Anna, placing his ear above her heart and testing her pulse.

"There is nothing seriously wrong with her," he announced. "Get her out of this trance, Hugh."

"You will now return to your normal state, Anna Wagner," I said wearily.

The girl drew a deep breath and opened her eyes.

Owen picked her up in his arms and carried her into the next room, where he laid her upon a couch.

Neither Peter nor I moved while he was absent. I felt exhausted to a degree almost beyond belief, and Peter appeared to be physically and mentally stunned.

Owen threw me a sharp look upon his return.

"We three will have to bunk in this room," he announced. "Better get some rest now. I'll wake you at nine in the morning."

I staggered over to the nearest divan, and in less than a minute I had sunk into a profound sleep.

It proved to be unnecessary, after all, for my brother to fill the role of an alarm clock. I awoke at eight, feeling entirely myself and ready for action. But I lay for a long while with half-closed eyes, musing on the extraordinary events of the night before and the bitter struggle that undoubtedly lay ahead of us.

The revelation concerning Coralie was of first importance. I did not pretend to understand it. Yet it confirmed an impression which the voluptuous Armenian woman had given me from the beginning. I had never quite believed that Buwalda was sincerely in love with her. I had fancied—though I had not put the idea into words—that he needed her, impersonally, for the working out of his plans. The original seance on Baltic Street apart, she had been close to him when he had escaped from Owen and me by passing through a truck, and he had taken her to the broker's offices on the occasion of his bid for a kingly fortune. It was safe to assume that he had had her with him the day before, when he had launched the amazing phenomena that had thrown New York into a panic.

My own experience of "throughth" served to prove the theory. At tea at the Kanarjians, she had been my companion, and it had been I who for a brief moment had been able to read minds. While passing a spoon through a rolled napkin in my lap, I had bridged the space that separated me from Buwalda. I had seen him in his apartment, and telepathically had drawn his malignant attention to myself.

Strange that Coralie should be the chief factor in all this! Her part was a passive one, I felt sure; but what was the source of her power? I could not help remembering the antique Oriental brooch with its astrological symbols, which both she and Buwalda had been so eager to recover. More strongly than ever, I suspected that it served as a link with the spirit of some great sorcerer who had died centuries ago. Would any brother share this view of it? I wondered.

Owen, however, was in one of his most taciturn moods when finally he saw that I was awake and stepped over to the divan where I had passed the night.

I sketched my random thought to him.

"Guesses are futile," he declared curtly. "We can know nothing until we have captured Coralie Griffin."

"Taken her away from Buwalda, you mean?"

"Yes."

"Do you think it can be done?"

"It is to be our job today. It must be done." .

I sat up and looked about the room. Peter was in an armchair. He smiled grimly and raised one hand in a brisk salute that told me his courage had been restored.

"How is Anna Wagner?" I asked.

"She is all right," said Owen. "Just a common-place little girl, this morning, scared at being a prisoner. But, God! what a medium she made last night!"

I could not find it in my heart to go and talk to her, interesting though it would have been to observe her reactions. Somehow, I felt that we had victimized her, had taken advantage of her weakness. It was one thing to say that our motives in fighting Buwalda were humanitarian; but did this wholly justify us for using, against her will, a girl who loved him?

So I shrugged the thought of Anna aside, sat down with Peter to the breakfast my brother had prepared and joined in the discussion of our plan of action.

Owen was coldly authoritative. For the reason he had outlined before our foray to Red Hook, it would be unwise for him to leave the apartment, he said. Yet he refused to allow a decisive coup against the mind reader to be attempted unless he could be of the party.

"I need not mince words with you," he went on.

"The being who keeps me from harm, so long as I remain here, is Vulpia. You saw how she behaved last night. The seance displeased her. However, I intend to summon her again—right away—and ask her to guard the house against the agents of Buwalda, even though I should be absent. The point is important, for we may be beaten in our first sally and need a place to which to retreat."

"Do you think that—that Vulpia"—I boggled over the name—"has recovered her good temper by this time?"

"She probably has. But to get the best results I should see her alone. I must ask you and Mr.

Kanarjian to wait in the next room."

I did not answer for nearly a minute. I had something special to say, but wondered how I could phrase it and yet maintain the fiction with Peter that Owen and I were not relatives.

"Later, we are to start upon an adventure from which we may never return. Is that not so?" I asked slowly.

"Certainly."

"Well, I cannot help drinking of my family, of my mother and sister. Anything may have happened to them yesterday. I suggest that you let me visit them now and find out how they are. It won't take much more time than your interview with Vulpia."

Owen smiled cryptically. "I accept the reproof," he answered. "By all means, do as you say."

"I should like to go with Hugh and be allowed call at my uncle's house, for the same reason," cut in Peter.

"Very good." Owen nodded. "Try to be back bytwelve o'clock. You're both running an additional risk, of course, but it can't be helped."

"If Tim Nolan, the chauffeur, keeps his promise and calls for us at ten, I'll feel safe enough," I remarked. "He's a daredevil who could fight his way out of any tight corner."

"I hope he does come," said Owen. "We'll need him for the big attempt. I'm willing to pay him a hundred dollars for his day, and you can tell him so with my compliments."

As if in answer to this statement, the doorbell rang loudly, persistently. I pushed the button that released the lock downstairs and stepped on to the landing. An Irish voice, merry and belligerent, came shouting up to me: "Mr. Purcell, there! Hey, Mr. Purcell! It's Nolan."

"Coming!" I yelled back.

Peter and I seized our coats and hats, and waving a hurried farewell to Owen we descended to the street.

I have always been glad that I insisted upon making this trip, side issue though it was in the curious an intricate web of the Buwalda affair. I should never have been able to look myself in the face if I neglected to learn how Mother and Eleanor were doing. But that was only part of it. The view I got of the city was bizarre in the extreme. The prevailing conditions had not been paralleled in our history, and I pray God may not occur again. For that morning represented the lull between two storms, the aftermath if a panic and the prelude to a fresh outburst of occult terrorism.

Tim Nolan greeted us flippantly as we approached his cab.

"Where do we go from here, gents?" he cried.

"Brooklyn puts me in mind of the Argonne in 1918.

One spot is as bad as another, and it's all one to me what we do."

I glanced up and down the sidewalk before answering him. I was looking for Buwalda's spy, but the Litter was nowhere in sight.

"Is it as tough as all that, Nolan?" I commented.

"How did you get through the night?"

"Damned if I know, Boss! There's many that didn't get through. The blow-up at the Navy Yard killed more than five hundred men. But I'm askin' for orders now, and if they mean action it won't make me sore."

"You're on for the day. The price is a hundred dollars, if you live to get it. The first place you'll take is Henry Street near Pacific." I gave him the address of Stefan Kanarjian.

"Them words is music in my ears," fairly chuckled Nolan. We had barely slammed the door of the taxi behind us when he sent his machine flying southwards in complete defiance of all speed regulations.

The first queer thing I observed was the body of a woman lying face downward at the corner of Hicky and Remsen Streets. She was evidently dead, yet there were no morbid spectators gathered about her and no signs that anybody proposed to remove the corpse.

Then I noticed that the windows of every house we passed were shuttered as if against a blizzard, and where there were storm doors these were closed. The few pedestrians skulked along by the railings, glancing nervously over their shoulders the while.

Farther down Hicks Street, three dead men blocked the roadway. The handle of a knife stood out starkly upon the breast of one of them. It was necessary lot Nolan to get out and push the nearest of the carcasse out of the way, to avoid running over it.

Atlantic Avenue, which ordinarily is buzzing with the traffic drawn by numerous retail stores, proved to be as deserted as any of the residential streets. The shops were barred, and apparently none of them were doing business that morning. Here and there a policebetraying a collapse of discipline in the Force.

I turned to Peter. "You understand what this means?" I said. "The direct results of Buwalda's deviltries have probably been trivial, compared with the general invitation to lawlessness that grew out of them. The city was ruled by murderers and thieves list night."

"There is no doubt about it," he replied glumly.

"If only you had killed the vile Turk when you saw him in the cemetery!"

A few minutes later, we drew up in front of the Kanarjian home on Henry Street. Promising to be hack as quickly as possible, Peter entered the house while I waited in the cab. It was not a long wait. He returned, the first shadow of happiness on his face that I had seen there in many hours.

"No one has harmed my people," he announced.

I then gave Nolan the address of my mother's flat on Utica Avenue, and we lost no time in resuming our journey.

The long run across the heart of Brooklyn served to confirm my fears that the life of the city was paralyzed. There were whole blocks in which we did not see a single person abroad. At all points, it was the same story of silent dwellings and barricaded stores.

But, on the other hand, roving bands of desperados were looting in certain streets, and the occasional taxis we met were filled with men whose errands I felt sure were evil.

As I approached my destination, I trembled with anxiety. But the doorbell was answered with the promptitude of normal times, and the next moment my mother's arms were about my neck. Eleanor stood at her elbow, and in the background stood Roberta Collins, the girl I had dreamed of marrying. Roberts had been visiting Eleanor the day before and had decided to remain overnight. It was an added relish to find that she, too, was safe.

I shall not record the excited comments that bubbled from all our lips. The womenfolk had a naive, pitiful idea of what was happening in the world, and I was forced to hide my knowledge from them and invent comforting lies. The latter would make dull reading. I introduced Peter and said that we two had been marooned together in a downtown office building.

We had talked for perhaps half an hour when suddenly there came a sharp rapping on the door. My mother made a move to see who it was, but I stepped hastily in front of her and opened the door a crack.

A uniformed telegraph messenger stood on the landing.

"Hugh Purcell?" he chirped. I nodded, startled.

He thrust a telegram into my hands and gave me his receipt book to sign.

The event seemed fantastic, in view of the social cataclysm. Yet the breakdown of the telephone system had affected only one means of communication, j mused. Why should telegrams not be sent, if messengers could be found to carry them? Slowly I tore open the envelope and read the following: ANNA ESCAPED SHORTLY AFTER YOU LEFT MY SESSION WITH VULPIA A FAILURE MUST STAKE ALL ON IMMEDIATE ACTION JOIN ME IN FRONT OF FIVE THOUSAND AND ELEVEN FIFTH AVENUE OWEN I folded the telegram carefully and placed it in my inside pocket.

"The head of the firm wants me to see him at once, Mother," I said, using the first excuse that came into my head.

She gave a dry sob, while Eleanor and Roberta both ran toward me with outstretched hands. I could only set them aside, as gently as I could. I caught Peter's eye and flashed him a wordless signal. Shutting our ears to the whimpering of the girls, we hurried from the apartment and in a few minutes were on our way to the scene of our supreme adventure.

In the cab, with Nolan obeying me to the extent of steering a more cautious course than was his wont, Peter and I reviewed our situation coolly enough. The visits we had paid to our homes had served to steady us, to lighten somewhat the gloom into which the state of public affairs in the city had plunged us. We knew that we were on our way to take part in a forlorn hope, but at least it promised to be a physical combat, and no man of ordinary courage shrinks from such a test. The disembodied forces of evil arc infinitely harder to face.

Peter did not fail, however, to bring into the open an aspect of our problem which I had subconsciously been trying to evade.

"I was greatly puzzled last night by the attitude of.

the spirits toward Doctor Proteus," he said bluntly.

"How so?"

"The hostility of the evil ones did not trouble me half so much as the caution of those who appeared to be our friends."

"You mean—"

"That it was strange they should have been unwilling to give him the address to which we are now going, Buwalda's address. They had come for the purpose of wiping us, and yet they seemed afraid to trust him too far."

"At these seances, the living often find the behavior of the dead irrational," I argued lamely.

"The spirits of Griffin and the lawyer Dickinson were amazingly rational, on the other hand. If they know more about Dr. Proteus than we do, how are we justified in scorning their distrust of him?"

"It may have been that they feared the vengeance of his enemies in the after-world, and not at all that they themselves wanted to hide the truth from him."

"Does he really have enemies of that kind?"

"Certainly. He is a learned occultist—a sorcerer, as they would have said in the Middle Ages. He has probed into regions which are closed to ordinary men, and because his motives are good the evil spirits detest him. What do you suppose those monstrous bats that visited us were? They were demons, come to destroy him and, incidentally, the rest of the company. The earth-spirit, Vulpia, drove them away. At a former seance, we were attacked by a demon who had assumed the traditional satanic form. Pretty serious enemies those, if you ask me!"

"Demons!" mumbled Peter, paling. "I heard talk of such beings as a child in Armenia." He crossed himself, and relapsed into silence.

I had come to my brother's defense in all sincerity, and as I spoke the conviction grew upon me that I had given the only possible explanation. But the menace hanging over us was made the darker thereby.

Owen had admitted in his telegram that the appeal to Vulpia had not been successful. She, too, might now be a foe. In the face of increasing hostility on the supernatural plane, how could we continue to dream of victory?

Luckily, the mood of despondency passed quickly for both of us. I am sure that the jovial companionship of Tim Nolan had much to do with it. He had started to carol an especially ribald verse concerning the well-known "Mademoiselle from Armentieres."

I laughed, Peter followed suit, and we snapped back into the realistic anticipation of battle which had thrillqd us at the beginning of the ride.

We had now crossed the bridge and were speeding northwards in Manhattan. I observed that the streets were somewhat more animated than they had been in Brooklyn. Groups of citizens had assembled in the open and were discussing events with a show of bravado. Nervous policemen moved them along, or joined in the debates, as it struck their individual fancies, There were even a scattering of newsboys plying their trade. I ordered Nolan to stop, and bought a paper.

But I can remember nothing from the hysterical headlines and the clutter of rumors printed on the front page. It was not a sane metropolitan newspaper I held in my hand, but a broadside of incoherent notes on the panic. I threw it away.

Reaching Fifth Avenue at Washington Square, we swept up the broad and almost deserted thoroughfare at seventy miles an hour. Nolan was in his element. He let out a whoop, gave his head a vigorous shake that set his cap over his left ear, bent low over his wheel and undoubtedly enjoyed all the thrills of an aviator crossing the Atlantic.

At Fifty-ninth Street, I induced him to slow down.

We were approaching our destination, and it was necessary that we keep a sharp lookout for Owen. As we skirted the Central Park side of the Avenue in the Seventies, I caught sight of my brother. He was seated tranquilly on a bench, just beyond one of the entrances to the park. No one else was in view, yet I shuddered in fear for him. It seemed an act of reckless defiance of the powers arrayed against us, that he should be there unguarded. Across the way, towering fifteen stories high, was an apartment house of the newest type. Its number was lettered plainly upon the glass of its arched portal 5011 Fifth Avenue - the number that had been wrenched from the hesitating spectral lips of James Griffin.

I called to Nolan to stop. Immediately, Owen arose, crossed the sidewalk rapidly and crowded into the cab with us.

"I got here half an hour ahead of you," he stated nonchalantly. "Had the luck to find a subway train running, and walked over from Lexington Avenue."

"But—for God's sake!—sitting in the open like that," I exploded. "Weren't you molested?"

"Not seriously. A man did try to stick me up. I think he was merely a footpad. I scared him off with this." He produced an automatic with a silencer attached, then slipped it back into his pocket. "Now, let us drive around the block and get the details of our plan straight."

Nolan swung the car down East Seventy-seventh Street.

"Tell us first how Anna Wagner escaped," I said.

Owen shrugged his shoulders. "It was quite mysterious. The door from the bedroom into the hall had been locked. I heard a sound and rushed in to find the lock lying on the floor. It had been drawn out of the wood, screws and all. The girl couldn't have done it.

But she had gone."

"You must have some theory to explain it."

"She received aid—super-normal aid, of course, since she was alone in the room and the lock was drawn from the inside."

"Then your fiat is no longer protected?"

"So it would appear."

"What did Vulpia say to you?"

"We will not discuss that. It's enough for you to know that she's offended."

I was conscious once more of a sense of horror at the strange bond that evidently existed between the succubus and Owen. But I would not let myself think about it. I Could not afford to. "Well, our errand up here?" I muttered. "Tell us what we are to do."

"Good. The first step is to find out whether Coralie is actually in that apartment house with Buwalda."

"We'll probably be killed at it. But suppose we learn that she is there. What then?"

"We must separate them."

"It's a big order."

"Not so big as you fear, maybe." He turned to Peter, and suddenly his manner became infinitely gracious, though there was no relaxing of his austere dignity. I realized in that moment that he was a natural leader of men, that hitherto he had held in reserve the full measure of his ability to impress and to charm.

"You are whole-heartedly with us in this attempt to save Coralie Griffin, are you not?" he asked.

"To the death, Dr. Proteus," replied Peter earnestly.

"You will unquestioningly obey my orders?"

"I will. I swear it."

"Then I send you on a mission. You must leave us for perhaps an hour. Cross Central Park on foot and visit the Griffin home on West 72nd Street. Make sure whether Coralie is there instead of here. If she is, do nothing about it, but return promptly and let us know."

"And should you locate her in the meantime?"

"Do not worry. I promise that you will be in at the finish with Buwalda—if we are!" replied Owen cryptically.

"You mean that he may have killed you before I get back?"

"Just that. The fortunes of war, you know. If you find us dead, you will have to choose your own course of action."

Peter nodded. "Very well, Doctor."

The taxi had almost circled the block, and Nolan halted of his own accord. Peter gripped my hand.

Then he jumped out and walked straight into the park, his shoulders erect like a soldier. At that parting, I did not believe I would ever see him again, and there were tears in my eyes.

But Owen was speaking to me rapidly, sternly: "We shall now invade Number Five Thousand and Eleven.

We carry no magic talismans with us. Have you got a gun?"

"No."

He slipped a second automatic out of his side pocket and thrust it into my hands. "Be ready for anything.

Remember that though our minds are closed to Buwalda, he is in telepathic control of the employees of the building. Undoubtedly, he has prepared them against our possible coming. He can make them see us as thugs or as mad dogs."

I did not answer. My brother stepped on to the sidewalk, and I followed him. He folded his arms and looked speculatively for an instant at the pugnacious, grinning face of Tim Nolan.

"Do you want to come along with us?" he snapped.

"It may mean a fight."

"You bet!" cried the wild Irishman, true to form.

"It's achin' for a shindy I am."

"Lock your car, then. Keep close behind us. Don't be surprised at anything we do. Obey orders as long as I'm alive to give them."

Owen swung around and led the way to the Fifth Avenue side-walk, The massive storm doors of Number Five Thousand and Eleven were closed, but not locked. There was no doorman, though a building of the kind would surely have been provided with one in normal times. He had fled from his post. We turned the handles one after another and found ourselves in a wide marble-lined lobby, at the far end of which was a desk with a man seated back of it. The place was more like a hotel than an apartment house. I identified it as being a luxurious cooperative of the newest model, which meant that there were at the most two flats to the floor, with some floors occupied by a single tenant. My quick glance took in the fact that the telephone switchboard was deserted. Two negro elevator men, richly uniformed in blue and gold, stood by the elevators. No one else was in sight.

We advanced in single file across the lobby, Owen ahead with his right hand in the pocket of his overcoat. The man behind the desk looked up, gave a violent start and began to grab wildly among his papers for something. His expression baffles description. He seemed to be sick with horror and fear, yet resolved to defend himself. Sweat beaded his forehead.

Owen broke into a run, forward. The house manager—for that plainly was what he was—screamed like a maniac. He fished a revolver from his papers, but before he could use it Owen had whipped out his automatic and fired point blank into the other's face.

He reeled, raised his hands half way to his head, then toppled to the floor. The silencer on the weapon had reduced the sound of the detonation to a hollow spitting, and the powder had been smokeless. It was a shocking deed to witness.

I started to follow my brother around the desk. He waved me back. "The negroes! The negroes!" he hissed. "You and Nolan get both of them. Don't let them escape."

I am convinced we were extremely lucky that those two elevator men happened to be of tire African race.

They were huge fellows and, in ordinary circumstances, could probably have made it hot for us. But as we rushed at them, they were gripped by a fantastic delusion concerning us. Whatever it was that Buwalda had put into their heads, it worked to our advantage rather than his. Superstition surged up in the negroes, and they babbled with fright.

Tim Nolan reached his man first. Joyously swinging his fists, the chauffeur landed a blow behind the car that sent his victim sprawling. I heard cries for mercy and the echoes of further pummeling as I slipped past them in pursuit of the other black. He had bolted into an open elevator, but I had closed with him before he could get his trembling hands on the control lever. I lay no claim to being a boxer. I doubt if I could have knocked down that heavyweight.

So I pushed my automatic into his ribs, forced him to right about face, and drove him from the elevator, a prisoner.

"Shall we be killin' the pair of them?" demanded Nolan.

"It won't be necessary," called Owen from the desk. "There's a big linen closet back here, where they'll be perfectly safe."

We half dragged, half bullied, the negroes into the closet and snapped the catch on them. I turned to Owen, who was coolly going through the papers in the drawers of the desk.

"Double-lock the front doors," he ordered.

"You—you can't mean it," I protested. "Lock ourselves in ? And how will Peter get to us when he returns?"

"Do as I say. The need of it will be brought home to you fast enough. When you have finished, locate the back exits to the building and close them. Cut off communication with the basement. If you find any servants roaming around this floor, run them into the street."

Dazed at the oddness of these instructions, I nevertheless set to work and with Nolan's help I had carried them out within fifteen minutes. At the head of the stairway to the basement, we had a little trouble with the janitor, who wanted to know what the screaming he had heard in the lobby signified. We forced him to retreat and locked the connecting door.

At no other point did we encounter an employee.

We then reported back to Owen. A plan of the building was spread out in front of him. He was studying it so intently that he failed to answer me when I spoke. The body of the house manager wallowed it his feet, and I experienced a sudden revulsion of feeling.

"I hope you know what you're doing," I said bitterly. "You've murdered one man as a beginning.

What's next?"

He raised his head with a jerk. "Murdered, did you say, Hugh? This person?" He pointed downwards.

"Of course."

"You're wrong. The bullet I fired at him was made of wax. He's only stunned."

With mounting astonishment, I inspected the body.

There was a red bruise in the middle of the forehead, but evidently the skull had not been pierced. The lips were parted naturally. I caught a flicker of the eyelids.

"Why, he's coming to!" I exclaimed blankly.

"Is he?" remarked Owen. "Gad! It would be amusing to question him and find out who he thinks we are. But we can't spare the time. Put him in the linen closet with the negroes. It doesn't matter what nightmares they have, so long as they are physically separated from us."

Nolan and I did as we had been ordered.

"A wax bullet!" I repeated, rubbing my eyes.

"Yes. I made it and doctored the first cartridge in the clip," my brother answered. "I felt sure I'd have to stop some innocent fool, merely to break into the building. But my remaining bullets are made of lead."

Owen's concentration upon the papers he had taken from the desk occupied him wholly for the next few minutes. He was unhurried, yet keen and sure. Now and then, he drummed on the board with his finger-tips. His face was the noncommittal mask to which I had grown accustomed throughout the windings of this grim affair. Suddenly, he threw himself back in the manager's swivel chair and spoke sharply.

"We know for certain that Buwalda has Coralie with him at this moment."

"How do we know it?" I asked foolishly.

"Because he needs her presence to perform his mind control, and the delusions of the men in the linen closet prove that he is functioning."

"Of course," I muttered, recalling what the spirits had said on this subject the night before.

"Good. I believe him to be here in the building, though that is not sure. The house records show me that he occupies the top floor, the fifteenth."

"Under his own name?"

"Yes. He never dreamed that the name would become notorious, or that we could track him down.

He'll get another surprise when we visit his top floor."

I shivered. "What chance have we against him?"

"You'll see. He's a coward at heart. He'd probably be glad to take to his heels right now."

"But, look here!" I dissented. "He can practice throughth. He can project his body through solid walls any time he pleases. Remember the truck on Court Street? What's to prevent his escaping?"

"Simpleton!" cried Owen. "He could get away— yes. But he'd have to leave Coralie behind him, and by that very act he'd lose his power. He will take other means. He will summon help—"

The speech was cut short by a thunderous explosion that seemed to have occurred only a few blocks away and that shook the structure in which we were. ..

"There's Buwalda's first stroke!" declared Owen coolly. "His campaign of terror is on again. I expected it.

We heard outdoors a mutter of voices which swelled into a roar. A squad of policemen came running along the sidewalk, stopped in front of Number Five Thousand and Eleven, and began to hammer with their nightsticks on the bronze of the storm door.

"It will hold for a considerable time. Come. We must work fast." With these words, my brother darted over to the elevators and put one of them out of comprehension by discharging his revolver point blank at the base of the control lever. He then stepped into the other elevator, and signed to us to follow him.

"You're the motor pilot, Nolan," he said. "Run us up to the fifteenth floor."

Grinning his admiration, the chauffeur obeyed. He whistled a few bars of the "Armentieres" ditty as he sent us flying upwards. But I could not bring myself to take the situation lightly.

"We are to shoot our way into Buwalda's apartment—is that it?" I asked.

Owen shrugged. "I found a master key in the desk.

It would admit us if he hasn't changed the locks. The shooting would come afterwards. But I have a better plan than that."

"What is it?"

He drew a sheet of paper from his breast pocket.

"A letter to Coralie," he answered carelessly, as if this .. assertion had been the most ordinary thing.

I took the paper from -him. At the same moment, the elevator reached its destination and stopped. Nolan started to open the door, but Owen touched him on the shoulder.

"Just a minute," he said. Then, to me: "Read it before we get off. We're safer here."

So it was, that, poised in the cage of an apartment house lift—fantastically poised on the threshold of the scene of our greatest adventure—I read the strange message I find transcribed among my notes: "Coralie, daughter of the Kanarjians: Greetings.

The brooch I made three hundred years ago charts the destiny of all those of our blood who are born under the sign of Virgo. Thou wert so born. The opal represents moonlight, and moonlight is thy soul. It is written that thou shouldst be under the empiry of a Capricorn man until the day when this message comes to thee. It will be carried in the mortal hand of a Scorpio man, and thou must seek him silently, wisely and swiftly at thy very door."

The signature was incomprehensible to me. It covered the width of the page, and was in the flowing Armenian script which suggests nothing so much as the decorative flourishes of an expert penman.

"Owen—my God! Did you fake this?" I gasped.

"Not at all. I got it through automatic writing. The signature and all. Just after you left this morning.

Then I summoned Vulpia, and—but we have no time to spare for talk. Let's to work!"

Slowly, so as to cause practically no noise, Nolan slid open the doors of the elevator, and we stepped into a corridor that ran the length of the building from north to south. Immediately opposite was a double door. Its great panes of glass were draped on the inside with yellow silk. It did not look like a formidable barrier, but we knew that it led merely to an antechamber. Down the corridor were three other doors, of solid wood in each case. No windows broke the monotony of the wall.

We prowled cautiously along, and I at least could not imagine how matters were to be brought to a head. It was one thing to have a cryptic communication for Coralie, and quite another to get it to her without Buwalda's knowledge. Nor did I feel sure that it would compel her to react favorably to us. The sinister influence of Buwalda might easily prove to be the stronger factor.

In the meantime, there was acute danger of a physical counter stroke, a sudden fusillade from ambush, that would wipe us out instantly.

Upon reaching the first of the smaller doors, I followed Owen's example and pressed my ear against it.

Not a sound could be heard in the apartment beyond. Results were similar at the second door. But at the third I could distinguish the faint rustling of a woman's dress, the tapping of feet on a carpeted floor and the sound of small objects being moved around on a table. I received the impression that we were listening in on a woman's boudoir.

Owen staightened and looked at me. He raised one eyebrow sardonically, and spoke under his breath, with a barely perceptible motion of his lips: "Oh, to be a mind reader at this moment! It may be Coralie in that room, and it may not. If it is she, Buwalda may be with her—or a servant."

He placed his hand to his forehead, and for half a minute there was a silence which seemed absolutely crushing. It was broken by the wailing of sirens on fire engines. The latter were coming from several directions, and were evidently converging upon the building in which we were.

"More help for Buwalda," whispered Owen. "The firemen will soon batter their way into the house.

And a squad of bewitched policemen at their heels!: Hm! Now, listen to me. Step back with Nolan to the double door there, and fire a revolver bullet through the glass."

"Do—do you really mean it?"

"You heard my orders. Obey!"

In a sort of stupor, I returned softly down the corridor. Nolan came with me, but said nothing. He was obviously impressed at last by the bizarre dangers that surrounded us. I drew the automatic from my pocket, leveled it at one of the panes backed with yellow silk, and pulled the trigger. The silencer muffled the report, but glass tinkled and crashed, and a huge irregular gap was opened in the door. My eyes moved toward Owen. He was holding the message to Coralie in his outstretched hand, but he waited—waited—for a few seconds, actually, though it appeared much longer.

Abruptly, he stooped to the floor and pushed the paper under the door. He rapped with his knuckles on the wood, and then withdrew a few paces.

My glance wavered between my brother and the pane of glass my bullet had wrecked. Which of us would draw the fire of the enemy first? I wondered.

But the seconds continued to pass, and no doom overtook us.

In spite of the fact that my mind had been prepared for it, I was astounded by the next development. The door near which Owen was standing swung open from the inside, and Coralie Griffin stepped into the corridor. She looked about her wildly. With a convulsive movement, she pulled the door shut behind her.

The letter from the old astrologer, her ancestor, fluttered from her clenched fingers.

Owen leaped to her side. He took her by the arm and guided her rapidly in our direction. His head was bent close to hers. He spoke to her, too low for me to hear. A swift gesture with his hand told Nolan and myself that we must return to the elevator, and the four of us crowded into it simultaneously. At the last moment, revolver shots spat wickedly at us from the apartment. But the door of the elevator was already closed, and the bullets flattened themselves against the bronze.

"There's a vacant flat on the next floor down," said Owen. "We'll get out there." A His voice was cool, almost icy, and the interior tension which had been holding the muscles of his face stiff was now wholly smoothed away. I had never admired him so much as I did at that instant. By separating Coralie from Buwalda, he had performed a wonderful piece of strategy. It came to me in a flash why he had had me fire at the front door. It had been for the purpose of drawing the medium to the point of attack, of making sure that Coralie would be alone when he slipped the message to her. A desperate gamble, but the result had been worth the risk.

On the fourteenth floor, Owen produced a master key and let us into a huge empty apartment. There was a rough deal table standing there, however, and some kitchen chairs. Paper-hangers had been using them. We laid the pots of paste and rolls of wall paper to one side, drew up the chairs to the table and sat down. Only then did Coralie Griffin look closely at me.

"I—I have seen you before," she remarked in her soft, uncertain voice. "Ah, yes, I remember! It was at my uncle's house. You—you frightened me that day."

"There was some misunderstanding. I meant no harm," I replied lamely.

"You had come with Peter. Y'ou were Peter's friend.

Now you are with these strangers. It all puzzles me."

"He was sent into your life by the first owner of the brooch," said Owen smoothly. "Just as I was sent today, when I was made the bearer of that letter to you from beyond the grave."

His words left me vaguely uncomfortable. I could not help wondering whether he believed what he had stated. His own experience with automatic writing was perhaps genuine, but my meeting with Coralie at the Kanarjians had been planned by ourselves. Was it not stretching the point to maintain that the old astrologer had inspired us? The woman, however, accepted it as a self-evident truth.

"I see! I see!" she murmured. "And now I am commanded to leave Mr. Buwalda. There can be no doubt of that. It was written."

She seemed curiously indifferent at breaking the bonds that had held her through long months. A new spell was upon her. She gazed at Owen, fascinated.

Suddenly I understood that it was her role to be a perpetual worshiper of the man—no matter who he might be—who was strong enough to use her passive and mysterious powers.

I had anticipated the next move, yet its results were none the less shocking to my nerves. My brother drew a pencil from his pocket, and dropped his hands into his lap. I was sitting beside him and could observe exactly what was done. He gave Coralie an intent, cryptic stare, and then stabbed with the pencil at the leg of the table. The former passed clear through the latter, as easily as a sharp dagger would pierce a lump of cheese.

At the same moment, a series of snapshot pictures reeled across my brain. The adventure of the seance at Baltic Street was duplicated, but this time the sorcerer was Owen. I saw tangled groups of men—policemen, firemen and citizens in plain clothes. They were running here and there, beating on doors, climbing stairs and galloping down long hallways. The scenes lacked continuity. I could not tell where the action was taking place. It was as though I had been enabled to cut in upon random episodes of a large panorama. And even as I watched, a change came over the conduct of the shadowy men. They halted in their mad course, glanced doubtfully about them and commenced to slink away. I am describing the events of a very few seconds of actual time, yet I received an impression that was definite and wide in its scope.

Then, abruptly, the motion picture was cut short.

Owen had drawn his pencil beyond the far side of the leg of the table. The ending of this physical demrastration of throughth had also terminated the mental phenomena in my brain.

Owen leaned across the table to Coralie. "You hold that the success of your seances with Buwalda must be credited to the magic properties of the brooch," he mapped. It was an assertion he had uttered, and not a question.

"Yes. Oh, yes!" she answered. "Mr. Buwalda thought so, too. He told me so."

A faint smile crisped my brother's lips. "He was a wise man," he said. "Now, let us go."

We all arose and took a few steps towards the door.

But of a sudden Coralie stopped and grabbed frantically at the shoulder of her blouse. Her hand flew up and down her chest, fumbling and patting on the siik.

"It's not here," she gasped. "Oh, this is terrible!

I left it on my dressing table."

"The brooch?" asked Owen.

"Yes. I mustn't go without it. I can't give it up.

I can't."

"Buwalda would think it a great prize, wouldn't he?"

"But of course! He would give his right arm to own it. If he has already found it, he will fight like a mad wolf to keep it."

"Which means that we must get it back for you— at all costs," said Owen. I thought I detected an undertone of grim irony in his voice.

He folded his arms, and mused for an instant Then he turned to me: "Peter Kanarjian has just arrived downstairs, Hugh.

I want you to fetch him. We need his help. Take Nolan along with you. We will wait here."

"But the lobby is besieged," I protested.

"You will have no trouble on that score."

"And you—so close to Buwalda up here. Is it safe?"

"I should think you'd understand by this time, Hugh, that I've become the most powerful man on earth," he replied slowly. "I have nothing whatsoever to fear."

His words sounded like a sinister boast. A'chill congealed my heart, I did not know why. But I obeyed him blindly. Followed by Nolan, I walked from the room, entered the elevator and rode down to the ground floor. An extraordinary state of affairs awaited me there.

The front doors of the building had been smashed in. The furniture in the lobby had been overturned.

There were gashes made by fire axes on all the doors.

The carpet had been trampled by scores of muddy feet. Yet the sole person visible was Peter, who leaned against a marble pillar, an expression of complete bewilderment on his face. I rushed to his side.

"Coralie was not at the house on 72nd Street," was first thing he said.

"I know. She is here." And I told him briefly what we had been doing.

"Thank God, she is safe!" he muttered. He passed his hand over his eyes. "Five minutes ago, Hugh, this lobby was full of raving lunatics. I entered just as they had started to swarm up the stairs. Then suddenly, they turned around and walked out. What does it mean?"

"Never mind talking about it now. We are needed on the fourteenth floor."

We hurried to the elevator, and in a few minutes Were back at the apartment where I had left Owen and Coralie. The latter were nowhere in sight, though the door stood wide open. We called their names and ran from room to room, searching for them. It was soon quite clear that they were not in the flat. Peter and I stared wordlessly at each other. We sensed a tragedy.

It was the logical thing to suppose that the missing ones had moved against Buwalda, for the purpose of recovering the brooch. Abandoning the lift, we ran down the corridor and stole up the flight of stairs that led to the next floor. The scene there was unchanged, generally speaking. The glass door I had broken with a bullet still gaped jaggedly. The door through which Coralie had come to us was closed, as we had left it.

But on the floor in front of it I caught sight of; woman's lavender handkerchief. She had carried the handkerchief. I had noticed it, rolled into a ball be-tween her fingers, as we had sat at the bare deal table in the empty flat.

The only explanation of its presence here was, that she had brought it back, had dropped it before she retraced her steps through that door.

"Peter, they are in Buwalda's apartment," I cried.

"We must follow. God knows what has happened to them!"

His tired face darkened, as the blood surged to the surface and mottled his skin. He clenched his teeth, and without answering me he drove his shoulder against the door. It was locked from the inside and did not give.

From the direction of the main entrance, I thought I heard the echo of a laugh. Then came the hellish racket of an automatic pistol discharged at short range, and bullets hummed about our ears.

There was but one conclusion to be drawn from the situation. Coralie had let Owen and herself into the apartment with her private key, or maybe he had used the skeleton key he had found downstairs.

But their quest for the brooch had failed. Buwalda had the upper hand over them. They were prisoners, or they were dead. Impossible, otherwise, to account for our being received now with laughter and bullets.

We must fight back, though I was painfully aware how slight were our chances of success.

"Break through one of these doors," I cried to my companions. "Each man for himself—and anything goes!"

Peter whipped an automatic from his back pocket.

I had guessed, from the day of our first meeting at the Ararat coffee shop, that he went armed. There was a deep streak of the primitive man in my Armenian friend. It was well, at this moment of crisis, that such was the case. It was well that Owen had supplied me, also, with a weapon.

But the supreme note of drama was furnished by Tim Nolan. Recent events with their implications of the supernatural had puzzled him sorely. Now, as I called for action, he uttered a joyous whoop and pulled from inside the breast of his coat a long-barreled, 45-caliber Army revolver which he most certainly had been carrying since the period of the Argonne battles he was so fond of talking about. He thrust this formidable piece of artillery at arm's length, and poured a volley of six balls in the direction of the front door of the apartment. The detonations in the narrow space of the corridor suggested the uproar of a trench mortar. After he had fired, he threw himself flat. Peter and I followed his example.

We were a little late in taking this precaution, but the person who had been shooting at us was plainly no marksman. None of us had been hit.

Balancing himself upon one elbow, Nolan reloaded his gun. "S-a-ay!" he drawled, "we'll plug our way in there, as easy as lookin' at yer." He did not wait for an answer, but crept forward to the door with the shattered glass. He used the butt of his revolver to knock out the remnants of the tall lower pane, and we advanced into the anteroom of the flat.

To my relief, the firing at us had ceased. It had probably been aimed from the transom, and we had passed out of range. Appreciating this, Nolan jumped erect. He placed the muzzle of his huge gun close to the lock of the inner door and blazed away with deadly expertness. Six bullets splintered the metal and wood within a radius of two inches. The lock crumbled and twisted under my eyes. Nolan seized the handle and jerked at it. It gave way. The door was open.

"One of us should guard the corridor," I muttered.

"I don't want to leave anybody a chance to run out by a back way."

I had expected to ask Peter to take on this thankless duty. But to my surprise, Nolan volunteered.

"Guard be damned!" he cried. "You go ahead, and I'll bust in the likeliest of them other doors, right now.

We're askin' to be killed, so why wait?"

He turned and rushed down the corridor, a fighting Irish lunatic if ever there was one. My eyes met Peter's, and we exchanged nods. We knew that the die was cast, and words were unnecessary. Shoulder to shoulder, we thrust aside the sagging, lockless door in front of us. We entered Buwalda's apartment.

I recognized the huge living-room at a glance. It was the room I had seen in my snapshot vision, the afternoon I had had tea with Coralie. On that occasion, however, the furniture had been for the most part baled, and had been piled in the middle of the floor. It was now properly distributed, except for a queer barricade of tables and chairs, with pill stuffed between their legs and rugs thrown over them. This barricade cut off the far end of the Iiving room. We gazed at it, startled, though I knew perfectly well that it was a defense thrown up against and that it would give our enemy a big advantage.

Surely Buwalda himself crouched behind his amabreastworks! We already had proof that he was armed.

It would seem that every moment we continued f stand there in the open, we were inviting him to kill us at his pleasure.

An automatic crackled. A faint wisp of smoke.

floated above the heaped rugs. I heard the zip-zip of bullets knocking plaster from the walls on both sides of us. Yet we remained unwounded. I was possessed by the most uncanny feeling about our immunity. It did not appear natural, and instead of gaining confidence I shuddered with a sudden spasm of fear, I threw myself behind a divan that stood a little the left, and Peter followed my example.

"Shoot! Shoot back!" I whispered.

We raised our guns and fired steadily at the barricade for perhaps half a minute. Chips flew from the ends of tables which were exposed. The rugs smouldered in spots. But the only effect was to silence the fusillade that had been directed at us. We saw no one, and we heard no cry of pain to indicate that we had red a hit. Possibly, I thought, Buwalda was dead with a bullet in heart or brain. The battle might be it, But this was a mere guess. The truce that had en was all the more ominous because it was profoundly mysterious.

"I—I can't stand this," Peter stammered. "Let's go down there and find out. Let's—"

He was interrupted by the formidable detonations l Nolan's revolver in the corridor. The chauffeur had chosen the door to attack, and was now blazing his way through. I pictured him entering the living-room before long, by the route of one of the bedrooms. It would mean that he would make his appearance directly in front of the barricade, and if Buwalda were alive he could murder Nolan at short range. Unthinkable that we should skulk idly while such a chance existed.

"All right! Come along!" I cried.

We jumped to our feet and charged forward, our revolvers held level with our breasts. I felt as if I were treading on air. A score of bizarre conjectures spun through my head as I ran. Was it all over with Owen, l Wondered? And Coralie, too? Why did Buwalda not perform some of his black magic against us? Why was he—the mind reader—reduced to fighting for his life with commonplace weapons, behind a heap of furniture? But perhaps he was dead! In a moment,.

I might be dead, also. Why did nothing happen, one way or another? Why? . . . Why? . . . Why?

When we had almost covered the distance, a gun roared at us point blank. I could see the loophole formed by folds of a rug through which it had been Bred. For an instant, the muzzle had protruded. It was simply incredible that I should not have been hit, yet such was the case. I uttered a gasping snarl, of amazement rather than defiance.

And then the tragic mystery moved to a swift climax.

Of a sudden, the head and shoulders of Daniel Buwalda reared up from behind the barricade. The lean face with its broad brow and triangular jaw, that face of a criminal mystic, was now as white as plaster. The teeth showed between the taut lips. The glassy eyes gleamed insanely, and the longish hair was flying about the man's ears.

In his right hand, Buwalda held a gun. Before either of us had the presence of mind to act, he had discharged it twice, once in Peter's direction and once in mine. We were less than two yards away from him at the time, and because we were so close I was able to judge with certainty that his aim was grossly inaccurate.

Buwalda did not really fire at me. He did not even look into my face. He looked and he fired at a point definitely to the left, as though it were there that he imagined me to be. I understood in a flash that he who had once created deadly illusions in the minds of others was now the victim of illusions. A grudging pity for him surged through me. I did not know how it had been accomplished, but I felt that his power had been destroyed. It would be easy for us to capture him, and to find some way of having him punished for his crime by due process of law. At all events, I could not have brought myself to kill him at that moment.

"Peter—hold on!—take him alive!" I called, my voice broken with excitement.

But the Armenian was flaming with an anger that placed him far beyond my control. This was the longawaited hour of his vengeance, and he would not forego it.

"Turk! Murderer! Betrayer of women!" he screamed, and pumped bullets into the breast of Buwalda.

The medium's hands jerked upwards convulsively.

He groaned once, and collapsed out of our sight on the far side of the barricade.

Peter and I stood rooted to the spot, staring grimly at each other while the seconds ticked by. A sort of daze had descended upon us. I was the first to struggle out of it. "Well, it's over," I mouthed hollowly, for want of something better to say. "You've killed him. But we'd best look at the body, to make sure."

We moved to one end of the pile of furniture, and squeezed our way between it and the wall. Somehow, we were not prepared for the pitiful spectacle that awaited us.

Anna Wagner, the magician's eternally faithful secretary—the little pale girl who loved him to the end—sat on the floor with her back against an overturned table. Buwalda's head was in her lap, and her tear-stained face was stooped over him. She looked up as we approached. Her gaze was stony, her sorrow too deep for words.

"Has—has he gone?" I mumbled.

Buwalda's eyes fluttered open. "Not—yet," he croaked with macabre emphasis. He struggled upwards until he rested on one elbow. "Coralie—beware of her. Too great a temptation."

"What do you mean by that?" I demanded.

"Her power—temptation—too much for any man.

I—I pay for my crimes," Buwalda said, and fell back with a spasm that brought the heart's blood welling to his lips and told us that his end had come.

Anna uttered a single shrill cry. She bent her face over that of the corpse, and her disheveled hair veiled them both.

Peter and I turned away, but there was no remorse In the Armenian's stern eyes. "I have killed a monster,"

he growled. "It is good that the world should be rid of him."

"Yes. You have greatly simplified matters," I agreed heavily.

"He was like a mad dog. To the last, he raved insults against Coralie."

I found it difficult to make an answer to that. I had a sinister suspicion, the full import of which I was not yet ready to acknowledge. "I hope to God that Coralie and—and Doctor Proteus, are safe in this flat," I muttered.

My words stung him to a frenzy of action. He rushed toward the nearest door. "But of course they are here," he cried.

He flung the door open, and we found ourselves in a bedroom. Its only occupant was Tim Nolan, who had just succeeded in breaking through from the corridor.

"It's glad I am to see yez," the chauffeur exclaimed.

"The heavy shootin' sure sounded to me like casualties."

"The man we came here to get is dead," I answered briefly. "Now help us to search this place for our friends."

Nolan wagged his head. "Fair enough! And I guess you don't have to worry about the killin', neither. The cops are on the run, and anything goes," he said, with irrepressible flippancy.

The bedroom was a small one. It might have been occupied by a maid, but if so the girl had fled, and there were no signs of Owen having passed that way, Beyond it was a boudoir. I assumed that it had been Coralie's. The dressing table was covered with bottle of perfume, cosmetics and ivory toilet pieces. I looked eagerly among them for the lost brooch. It was not there.

Peter threw open the doors of the closets, as if he feared that the pair we sought had been killed and their bodies concealed fantastically behind the feminine garments that hung inside. He fell to his knees, peered under the divan, then crept into the next room and searched beneath the bed. I followed him slowly, Already, I as good as knew that our quest was going to be fruitless. I had a premonition that the vast apartment was deserted, except for the pitiful Anna mourning over the scoundrel she had loved.

Without uttering a word to each other, we passed from room to room. We examined Buwalda's own bedroom, the still unfurnished library, a couple of small storerooms and even the kitchen. All were deserted. As far as I could tell, Coralie had not reentered the premises after we had last seen her. Both she and Owen had vanished.

We returned finally to the scene of our recent battle, and stood close together, our heads averted from the dead Buwalda. Peter questioned me mutely.

Instead of replying to him, I addressed Anna.

"Do you know what has happened to the Doctor and Mrs. Griffin? Have you seen them? Have they been here together?"

There was no reply. I stared at Anna then, and perceived that she had fainted.

"Peter, the only reasonable guess that we can make is," I said, "that Doctor Proteus has taken Coralie to his place on Columbia Heights. Shall we go there?"

"Yes, Hugh. But what shall we do with Anna? We can't leave her alone with a corpse."

I was surprised that his fierce Armenian soul had allowed for this humane thought. Surprised and pleased! I, too, had been worried about Anna.

Stepping over to her, I clapped my hands together, close to her ear. I took her by the arm and shook her brusquely. In a little while, her eyes opened. I did not give her the time fully to recover consciousness, but said: "You are once more subject to my will, Anna Wagner. You will pass into a trance and will go wherever I take you."

It seemed a cruel gesture, but I could not have hypnotized her while she was in a normal physical faint, and without the aid of hypnosis she certainly would not have obeyed me.

Her features relaxed. The pupils of her eyes widened. She became as she had been on two former occasions—a docile instrument in my hands.

"Come, Anna. Come with us now," I said gently.

With apparently complete indifference, she laid aside the head of Buwalda which had been resting in her lap, and stood up. There was a small stain of blood on the front of her skirt. I fetched from Coralie's boudoir a rich satin cape and placed it about her. It effectively hid the tell-tale sign. The four of us then walked in single file from the apartment, and closed the door forever upon the mortal envelope of Daniel Buwalda.

I find it difficult at this point to describe the curious and subtle change which had come upon the New York City to which we descended. I was aware of it the moment we stepped out of the elevator. The lobby of the building still bore marks of physical violence, which had been left by the mob that had passed that way. But rational human beings were now at work repairing the damage in a rational manner. His hands plunged in his trousers' pockets, the very house manager whom Owen had shot down with a wax bullet was superintending the two negroes we had overpowered. They were industriously swabbing the floor, and had already collected in a neat pile the debris of broken furniture.

I stiffened involuntarily at the sight of these men we had handled so roughly. But when the house manager turned his head in our direction, it was plain that he did not recognize us. He smiled pleasantly, a trifle apologetically.

"Thank God the riot is over!" he said.

I bit on my dry lips. The red bruise on the fellow's forehead, where the bullet had struck, fascinated me. "You had a tough time of it, eh?" I asked blankly, "It was pretty bad. Some terrible cut-throats—they looked more like apes than men—rushed in here about an hour ago. They got me first." He touched his forehead. "I came to my senses in the linen closet where I had been thrown along with the two Jamaican elevator men. Perhaps we were lucky, for we were protected in there from the worst of the racket later on. When it ended, the Jamaicans and I managed to pick the lock."

As he spoke, I wondered who on earth he was now taking us for? Queer that he should not find it out of order for three men, including a chauffeur, to come downstairs with a bemused girl. But naturally I left it unsaid.

"Do you think it is safe for us to go outdoors?" I asked, to test him.

"Oh, yes, sir!" he answered politely. "The police have things well in hand."

I was far from believing him, but upon reaching the sidewalk I saw a squad of policemen directing the removal of some wrecked cars from the Avenue. There was a businesslike air about them, such as officers of the law had not worn during the past week. The sergeant in charge glanced keenly at us, but evidently -sided that we were harmless and turned back to job.

Tun Nolan's taxi—miraculously—was standing exactly where we had left it. We took our seats, and in few seconds we were on our way to Brooklyn.

The ride down Fifth Avenue was like a tour across a battlefield just after the fighting has stopped. Everywhere, we saw evidence of destruction. The final outburst of terrorism inspired by Buwalda must have affected tens of thousands of persons. But the nightmare was over, and the citizenry seemed to know it.

The pavements were crowded with sightseers, who stared at the wreckage, chattered normally and grumbled when policemen ordered them to move on.

A pall of fear had been lifted from the city. An almost childish gayety had replaced the recent hysteria. It is this new attitude which I find it hard to depict. People had become, of a sudden, infectiously happy. They giggled and clapped each other on the shoulders. They took deep breaths and held up their heads in a world grown safe.

The reader no doubt will have understood as quickly as I did that Buwalda had been made harmless by the absence of Coralie, even before he had been shot by Peter. But that was not enough to explain the high spirits of the public. The latter would scarcely have responded so swiftly to a mere canceling of the sorcerer's evil suggestions. It would have taken time to realize that his tyranny was indeed ended.

I felt that a positive force was now operating— a good force instead of a bad one. That was why New York rejoiced, though unaware of the reason. And the answer, of course, was Owen! He was alive, he was with Coralie. Her mediumship made him no less powerful than Buwalda had been. He could compel humanity to think and feel and act, precisely as he chose to dictate.

I trembled a little at the thought. How would Owen bear up under the daily use of so formidable a gift?

I was eager to discuss it with him, and in the meantime I could not bring myself to the point of telling Peter what I guessed.

We arrived without mishap at the house on Columbia Heights. I turned to the Armenian.

"There's no reason to take Anna upstairs," I said, "Her memories of the place are not happy ones. She's a victim in this whole business, and we ought to spare her as much as we can. I suggest that you escort her to her home, and then join me here."

"All right, Hugh," he answered quietly. "I'll be glad to do it."

I passed my hand over Anna's brow. "You'll recover from this trance five minutes after you're back in your own room," I whispered. "You'll have for gotten everything that has happened to you in the past two days. And from now on you are released from the obligation to become hypnotized at my command. I set you free, Anna Wagner."

I then jumped out of the cab, paid Nolan the sum I had promised him and gripped him warmly by the arm. "You're one grand scout," I said. "Money can never pay you for the help you've been to us, but I hope I'll see you again; I hope we'll be friends for life."

Embarrassed, he ran his fingers through his hair, dislodging his always unsteady cap. "It's I who should he thankin' you, Mr. Purcell. You gave me a chance at some swell fightin'. And—sa-ay—I'll be drivin' your pal back here in a few minutes, won't I?"

"Yes, but I'm not likely to see you. I'll be busy upstairs. Get in touch with me tomorrow—any time.

It's good-by for today, Nolan."

I swung around and almost ran into the building.

I was in the grip of an uncanny warning that I would not find Owen in his flat, and yet that I would be prevented from seeking farther for him. I mounted the stairs two at a time, then as I stood outside the "door I hesitated in a strange bewilderment before knocking.

Receiving no response, I finally took hold of the knob and pushed. The door was unlocked. It gave way, and I stepped into a scene which surpassed weirdest forebodings.

The rooms had been devastated. It wasn't a case of ordinary damage, such as burglars might have caused The furniture had been rent apart with a violence ml thoroughness that simply was not human. I observed with amazement that no weapons had been used to chop or saw the wood. The sections had been dis-jointed, and then broken into small pieces. The carpets were in shreds, the mirrors and vases smashed.

Every book had been taken separately from the shelves and torn to fragments. The clothes in the closets had been reduced to rags. The beds, divans and pillows had been disemboweled, and the greater part of the debris was hidden under a welter of straw and feathers. Even the wallpaper hung in strips.

Picking my way through this unbelievable confusion, I came upon the crystal globe which had figured in the seances that Owen and I had held. It seemed to be the only undamaged object in the place. Perhaps that was why I clung to it, as I moved to the one spot where it was possible to rest in comfort—the built-in window seat overlooking the harbor.

I sat there dazed, uncomprehending, waiting for I did not know what. Then a phenomenon that I had never before experienced assailed my inner senses. A voice was speaking to me without words—Owen's —and it was registering with the sureness and clarity of everyday human speech. When I write, without words," I mean without the sound of words.

I felt the phrases rather than heard them, but all the pedal values of my brother's inflection were conveyed to me. I assumed instantly that this was a case of pure telepathy.

"What do you think of the mess Vulpia made of my flat?" asked Owen in his mysterious language of the future.

"God! So it was the succubus who did it!" I exclaimed aloud.

"Don't shout. It isn't necessary with me now. Look inwards and imagine what you have to say."

"She has left nothing intact. Why was she so vicious?" I responded, following his instructions.

(From this point on, I shall record the conversation as if it had been a normal one. I have no wish to confuse the reader with my feeble attempts to describe the extraordinary and direct communion of our two minds.) "Vulpia was crazily jealous of me. You noticed that yourself, when Anna was there," said Owen. "She started to wreck things this morning. It's a wonder she didn't kill the girl. But one of her first acts was to tear the lock loose from the door, and Anna took advantage of the situation to escape. Then I telegraphed you to meet me uptown, and left the roor to Vulpia. It's all right. I've no further use for my Old Stuff."

"Is it safe for me to be sitting here?" I asked, "Isn't it likely that she'll attack me?"

"Do not worry. She's a stupid earth spirit. She won't connect you with me, in view of the fact that I'm not present in the body. Only women enrage her anyway."

"I've understood for some time that she's infatuated with you. Now I begin to suspect—"

"That there was a love relationship, which I encouraged?" my brother cut in. "I admit it. I could not have attached her to me otherwise, and I found her extremely useful. It is the nature of a succubus to be devoured by lust. Read Saint Augustine and Pope Innocent VIII. But let us talk of more important things. I suppose you wonder why I left you to fight Buwalda alone?"

"Yes. Why did you?"

"I was in a hurry to take Coralie away. We went upstairs for the brooch, and I found that Buwalda had absolutely no mental defense against the combination of her mediumship and my employment of throughth, His will power proved to be feeble, anyway. I made him hide his head in a corner until we left. Later, when you came, I had him seeing doubles of you and iter Kanarjian. He shot at them, and not at you.

You must have observed it."

"I did. A practical joke, eh? It strikes me as having been a pretty gruesome one for everybody concerned."

"My dear chap, on the contrary, it was sheer vertical justice. Buwalda could not be allowed to live.

You reached that conclusion yourself at the time. I gave the Armenian the privilege of killing him—the Armenian who hated him so, and who loved Coralie.

What better way could have been devised?"

I did not "speak" again for several minutes. The grim raillery in Owen's linking of Coralie's name with Peter had shocked me.

"Tell me," I demanded finally, "is it a fact that you on do all the things that Buwalda used to do?"

"It is a fact, Hugh. The source of power is Coralie, as we learned at the seance. She is wholly passive. But her mere physical presence enables me to perform the magic, to perform throughth and step into the fourth dimension. She is a medium in a hundred million, perhaps the only one of her kind on earth."

"Are you any nearer to understanding the principle of throughth?"

"No—not yet. The spirits were honest when they refused to explain it to us. They did not have subtle enough words at their command. And they were afraid of me, Hugh, afraid that I would become an evil-doer like Buwalda. I don't blame them for balling, for not even trying to explain. The responsibility of piercing to the secret must rest upon me alone,"

"You think you can learn the 'why' of the secret Owen?"

"Yes. I shall study and experiment for years if needs be. I shall give up everything else for the sake of this knowledge. So I have taken Coralie and gone into hiding with her. There's no other way."

"Into hiding?" I repeated slowly, my heart constricted by a sudden chill. "Is that fair?"

"Fair to whom?"

"To me, first of all. I told you about Buwalda after the seance on Baltic Street. We went into the investigation together. And now you shut me out of the finale."

"It cannot be helped. I am a scientist, not a trifler.

I feel the need of solitude, and I consult no one as to my right to have it. When I know the whole truth in this matter, I shall share it with you."

"The really scientific attitude would be to give all serious students of psychic phenomena a chance to work on it with us," I persisted. "The things we have already learned are too important, too dangerous, to be kept to ourselves. I implore you to tell the Societies for Psychical Research."

The only answer I received was a laugh. For the first time within my memory of him, my brother Owen laughed. The effect was monstrous, uncanny, ft was a laugh that reached me without the agency of sound—a telepathic laugh. Somehow, its inner significance was more definite than if I had been looking into his face and had heard the timbre of his voice. I knew that he was mocking at my altruism.

I knew, too, what my premonitions earlier in the afternoon had meant. Owen, no matter how cleverly he disguised his motives, had succumbed to the lure of the terrible power that once had been Daniel Buwalda's and now was his. He would keep if to himself. So far, he had used it for good and not for evil. I could only pray that he would hold to a beneficent course.

Undoubtedly he read my thoughts, for he said quietly: "It is knowledge that I love—the bright, pure flame of knowledge. I have no lust of cruelty, and I care nothing about money. You need not fear that I will ever harm humanity."

I lacked the heart to reply to him. After a while, he remarked in the cool, impersonal manner I knew so well: "There's one point you might like to have cleared up. I refer to Coralie's brooch. It really has no magic properties, I'm sorry to say."

"Then why did you go to the trouble of getting it back for her?"

"For a very sound reason, my dear chap, She thinks that her value as a medium depends upon that brooch. She has always thought so. When she assisted Buwalda, it was her firm conviction that the spirit of her ancestor, the old astrologer, intervene!

because she was wearing the trinket. She will continue to cherish the same belief in her relationship with me."

"You intend to leave her in that delusion?"

"But of course! She is a naive person. It would not be wise to confuse her with facts too difficult for her brain to grasp."

"When Buwalda was operating on Wall Street, the brooch was in our possession," I objected. "How did she account for his success?"

"She did not realize that he was doing anything extraordinary, on that occasion. Mere telepathy meant nothing to her. But at seances, when she could actually see him pass tambourines through screens, and so forth—ah, it was different then! She attributed everything to the brooch. A harmless little fancy on her part, don't you think?"

"You are a cynic," I muttered.

"Not a cynic, but a lover of truth, who is willing to use weak human beings as well as strong ones in the pursuit of truth," he answered. "Now, good-by, Hugh."

"Owen," I cried desperately, "how do I know that I have been actually communicating with you? It may all be a dream."

"Look in the crystal globe," he murmured.

I lowered my eyes, and for a moment I saw my brother's face gazing at me from the center of the globe. He smiled faintly, moved his head sideways in a familiar gesture, and nodded. The next instant, the vision had disappeared.

I sat in the wrecked flat, stunned with amazement, wondering how I should explain the climax of our adventure to Peter Kanarjian. But it does not matter to the reader what I told Peter when the latter returned.

It matters only that my brother Owen lives today somewhere in New York City, a man with the power to control minds. He can add vastly to the happiness of the world if he wishes, or he can become a second Daniel Buwalda.

I swear by all I hold sacred that if he chooses the path of evil, I shall fight him to the death, with ten times the energy that I gave to fighting the monster of Baltic Street.