Address on Signing Health Care Reform Bill into Law

Delivered 23 March 2010, Washington, D.C.

Today, after almost a century of trying -Today, after over a year of debate -Today, after all the votes have been tallied, health insurance reform becomes law in the
United States of America -- today.
It is fitting that Congress passed this historic legislation this week. For as we mark the turning
of spring, we also mark a new season in America. In a few moments, when I sign this bill, all
of the overheated rhetoric over reform will finally confront the reality of reform.
And while the Senate still has a last round of improvements to make on this historic legislation
-- and these are improvements I’m confident they will make swiftly -- the bill I’m signing will
set in motion reforms that generations of Americans have fought for, and marched for, and
hungered to see.
It will take four years to implement fully many of these reforms, because we need to
implement them responsibly. We need to get this right. But a host of desperately needed
reforms will take effect right away.
This year, we’ll start offering tax credits to about 4 million small businessmen and women to
help them cover the cost of insurance for their employees. That happens this year.
This year, tens of thousands of uninsured Americans with preexisting conditions, the parents
of children who have a preexisting condition, will finally be able to purchase the coverage they
need. That happens this year.
This year, insurance companies will no longer be able to drop people’s coverage when they
get sick. They won’t be able to place lifetime limits or restrictive annual limits on the amount
of care they can receive.
This year, all new insurance plans will be required to offer free preventive care. And this year,
young adults will be able to stay on their parents’ policies until they’re 26 years old. That
happens this year.
And this year, seniors who fall in the coverage gap known as the doughnut hole will start
getting some help. They’ll receive 250 dollars to help pay for prescriptions, and that will, over
time, fill in the doughnut hole. And I want seniors to know, despite what some have said,
these reforms will not cut your guaranteed benefits. In fact, under this law, Americans on
Medicare will receive free preventive care without co-payments or deductibles. That begins
this year.
Once this reform is implemented, health insurance exchanges will be created, a competitive
marketplace where uninsured people and small businesses will finally be able to purchase
affordable, quality insurance. They will be able to be part of a big pool and get the same good
deal that members of Congress get. That’s what’s going to happen under this reform. And
when this exchange is up and running, millions of people will get tax breaks to help them
afford coverage, which represents the largest middle-class tax cut for health care in history.
That's what this reform is about.
This legislation will also lower costs for families and for businesses and for the federal
government, reducing our deficit by over one trillion dollars in the next two decades. It is paid
for. It is fiscally responsible. And it will help lift a decades-long drag on our economy. That's
part of what all of you together worked on and made happen.
That our generation is able to succeed in passing this reform is a testament to the persistence
--- and the character -- of the American people, who championed this cause; who mobilized;
who organized; who believed that people who love this country can change it.
It’s also a testament to the historic leadership -- and uncommon courage -- of the men and
women of the United States Congress, who’ve taken their lumps during this difficult debate.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yes, we did.
THE PRESIDENT: You know, there are few tougher jobs in politics or government than leading
one of our legislative chambers. In each chamber, there are men and women who come from
different places and face different pressures, who reach different conclusions about the same
things and feel deeply concerned about different things.
By necessity, leaders have to speak to those different concerns. It isn’t always tidy; it is
almost never easy. But perhaps the greatest -- and most difficult -- challenge is to cobble
together out of those differences the sense of common interest and common purpose that’s
required to advance the dreams of all people -- especially in a country as large and diverse as
ours.
And we are blessed by leaders in each chamber who not only do their jobs very well but who
never lost sight of that larger mission. They didn’t play for the short term; they didn’t play to
the polls or to politics: One of the best speakers the House of Representatives has ever had,
Speaker Nancy Pelosi.
AUDIENCE: Nancy! Nancy! Nancy! Nancy!
THE PRESIDENT: One of the best majority leaders the Senate has ever had, Mr. Harry Reid.
To all of the terrific committee chairs, all the members of Congress who did what was difficult,
but did what was right, and passed health care reform -- not just this generation of Americans
will thank you, but the next generation of Americans will thank you.
And of course, this victory was also made possible by the painstaking work of members of this
administration, including our outstanding Secretary of Health and Human Services, Kathleen
Sebelius -- and one of the unsung heroes of this effort, an extraordinary woman who led the
reform effort from the White House, Nancy-Ann DeParle. Where’s Nancy?
Today, I’m signing this reform bill into law on behalf of my mother, who argued with insurance
companies even as she battled cancer in her final days.
I’m signing it for Ryan Smith, who’s here today. He runs a small business with five employees.
He’s trying to do the right thing, paying half the cost of coverage for his workers. This bill will
help him afford that coverage.
I’m signing it for 11-year-old Marcelas Owens, who’s also here. Marcelas lost his mom to an
illness. And she didn’t have insurance and couldn’t afford the care that she needed. So in her
memory he has told her story across America so that no other children have to go through
what his family has experienced.
I’m signing it for Natoma Canfield. Natoma had to give up her health coverage after her rates
were jacked up by more than 40 percent. She was terrified that an illness would mean she’d
lose the house that her parents built, so she gave up her insurance. Now she’s lying in a
hospital bed, as we speak, faced with just such an illness, praying that she can somehow
afford to get well without insurance. Natoma’s family is here today because Natoma can’t be.
And her sister Connie is here. Connie, stand up.
I’m signing this bill for all the leaders who took up this cause through the generations -- from
Teddy Roosevelt to Franklin Roosevelt, from Harry Truman, to Lyndon Johnson, from Bill and
Hillary Clinton, to one of the deans who’s been fighting this so long, John Dingell. To Senator
Ted Kennedy. And it’s fitting that Ted’s widow, Vicki, is here -- it’s fitting that Teddy’s widow,
Vicki, is here; and his niece Caroline; his son Patrick, whose vote helped make this reform a
reality.
I remember seeing Ted walk through that door in a summit in this room a year ago -- one of
his last public appearances. And it was hard for him to make it. But he was confident that we
would do the right thing.
Our presence here today is remarkable and improbable. With all the punditry, all of the
lobbying, all of the game-playing that passes for governing in Washington, it’s been easy at
times to doubt our ability to do such a big thing, such a complicated thing; to wonder if there
are limits to what we, as a people, can still achieve. It’s easy to succumb to the sense of
cynicism about what’s possible in this country.
But today, we are affirming that essential truth -- a truth every generation is called to
rediscover for itself -- that we are not a nation that scales back its aspirations. We are not a
nation that falls prey to doubt or mistrust. We don't fall prey to fear. We are not a nation that
does what’s easy. That’s not who we are. That’s not how we got here.
We are a nation that faces its challenges and accepts its responsibilities. We are a nation that
does what is hard. What is necessary. What is right. Here, in this country, we shape our own
destiny. That is what we do. That is who we are. That is what makes us the United States of
America.
And we have now just enshrined, as soon as I sign this bill, the core principle that everybody
should have some basic security when it comes to their health care. And it is an extraordinary
achievement that has happened because of all of you and all the advocates all across the
country.
So, thank you. Thank you. God bless you, and may God bless the United States. Thank you.
Thank you.
All right, I would now like to call up to stage some of the members of Congress who helped
make this day possible, and some of the Americans who will benefit from these reforms. And
we’re going to sign this bill.
This is going to take a little while. I’ve got to use every pen, so it’s going to take a really long
time. I didn’t practice.
We are done.